Wedgwood Queensware coffee pot with transfer-printed enamel, late 1760s. Transferprinted enamel offered a quick and reliably consistent way of decorating pots. 'Making Machines of the Men' \*Weatherill, p.60. complicated and hard to reproduce accurately, were unsuited to Wedgwood's requirement for quantity production. To prevent variation and to make enamelling cheaper, Wedgwood experiimented with enamel-printed transfers, which were applied to the pots and baked on. In time, the pictorial part of the enamel designs on creamware was generally applied by transfers, with the hand painters working only on edging and repeat patterns, which they could reproduce accurately. The only factor that still allowed room for variable results was the workmanship of Wedgwood's employees. Wedgwood's intention to make Queensware a consistent, uniform product could not be achieved as long as his workmen were free to make idiosyncratic variations in the pots. To some extent, this freedom had already been curtailed by changes that had taken place in the potteries long before Josiah Wedgwood went into business. Although pottery had once been a craft industry, in the sense that a single individual was responsible for all the stages of making a pot, this form of production had ceased in Staffordshire before the beginning of the eighteenth century. From the 1730s, if not earlier, potters had specialised in one of the branches of the trade, such as throwing or handling, or making glaze and slip. A typical mid-eighteenth century pottery consisted of a number of workshops, each with employees engaged in a particular task. At Whieldon's pottery in the 1750s, the work was divided into at least seven different occupations, with each workman usually doing a single task.\* As several craftsmen were responsible for the 32