Enamelling and modelling in a French porcelain factory, 1771. The division of tasks, and specialisation of workmen in each branch of work were recognised characteristics of the royal porcelain factories. In this, as in the technique of enamelling, Wedgwood was applying to cheaper goods methods previously reserved for high quality goods. From Le Comte de Milly, 'L'Art de Porcelaine', plate 8, in Encyclopédie Méthodique des Arts et Métiers, Académie des Sciences, Paris, 1771. \*Farrer, vol. II, pp. 147-148. \*Finer and Savage, pp.82-83. making of a single pot, no individual was able to make any major change to it. Even so, men at each stage still had some control over the final results. For example, a workman employed at sprigging - the application of moulded ornaments to a pot - could make minor variations between pots, while a man working at glazing could cause major ones. Wedgwood frequently complained about his workmen's apparent inability to produce consistent results, especially with the ornamental wares. Wedgwood wrote once to Bentley of his problems: "... the mixtures, & the colours too, after all the attention we can give them are liable to so many accidents, & alterations, from the Workmens unhandiness and want of Ideas . . . 'For Instance when the Clays are perfectly mixt to produce a wildness, & extravaganza in the Pebble, if the Workman gives the batts a twist edgeways, instead of keeping them flatt when he puts them into the mould, a little stringiness is produced which shews the Pott, instead of a finely variegated Pebble.'\* Wedgwood had already shown his concern with consistency a few years earlier when he had written to Bentley that he was 'preparing to make such Machines of the Men as cannot Err.'\* For his creamware, just as much as his ornamental ware, this was indispensable to his success. Wedgwood made the workmanship more reliable either by retraining the men or by dividing the labour into yet more stages, which could be supervised more closely. Teaching his men to work to higher standards than was customary in the potteries was both slow and unpopular with them. Breaking down the production process into more stages had the advantage that, for some of the tasks, he could make do with less skilled labour. The introduction of enamelling on creamware is an excellent example: in 33