\*N. McKendrick, 'Josiah Wedgwood and Factory Discipline', Historical Journal, vol. IV, no. 1, 1961, pp. 30-55. The Value of Modellers \*Mankowitz, p.34. \*A. Young, A Six Months Tour through the North of England, London, 1770, vol. III, p. 308. Account book of Josiah Wedgwood, Wedgwood archives, E2-1339. greenware, the two functions of glazing and decoration had been combined in the single process of glazing, but in creamware, glazing and enamelliing were carried out by entirely separate sets of people whose tasks were defined by exact sets of instructions and supervised by overseers.\* While pottery was a craft industry, as it was in Staffordshire until the end of the seventeenth century, the form of a pot was most likely decided upon by the man who was to make it. However, when the manufacture of pots was broken down into processes carried out by different workers, an additional stage was required, the preparation of instructions for the various workmen to follow: in fact, a design stage. The work of designing, or modelling as it was known in the potteries, became a distinct and separate stage in the production of pots, although it was probably done by a craftsman or by the master potter working in the same factory. By the 1750s not only was modelling recognised as a separate activity, but there were individuals described as modellers, whose sole task was to make prototypes for the other craftsmen to work from. For example, William Greatbatch, who subsequently set up on his own and supplied many of the earthenware pots which Wedgwood fired with his green glaze, worked in the 1750s as a modeller for Whieldon.\* The success of attempts "˜to make machines of the men' depended on the exactness of the modellers' instructions, for, unless these were precise, it was impossible to restrain the men from introducing variations into their work. Good modellers became increasingly indispensable to Wedgwood as the craftsmen's freedom to control the form of the pot was curtailed; nowhere was this more so than in creamware, where the craftsmanship was directed entirely towards achieving uniformity. The modeller's value in preparing an exact design increased with the number of pots made from it, because he was, in a sense, taking over a fraction of the work that had once been done by each craftsman every time he made a pot. The monetary value of the modeller's work could actually be calculated as the sum of the value of all those fractions of the craftsmen's work. Because of the importance of their services, modellers were the most highly paid employees in the potteries. In 1769, Arthur Young reported that a modeller received a salary of Â£100 per annum, approximately twice the wage of skilled craftsmen, who were paid between seven and twelve shillings a week; the sculptor John Flaxman, who worked freelance for Wedgwood, was paid at the rate of one guinea per day for preparing designs.\* In spite of their apparently high earnings, modellers' wages did not necessarily correspond to the value of their work. If this exceeded what they were paid in wages, the difference would have been profit to the entrepreneur. Since the modellers were paid a flat rate and not a royalty for their designs, the employer's margin also increased with the number of pots produced from a single design, and the use of modellers opened up the way to greater profitability. It was not just the division of labour in the potteries that made modellers indispensable to Wedgwood. Their value became even more apparent to him when he began to change the style of his pots. Since neo-classicism originated far from Staffordshire in the centres of fashion in London and abroad, modellers from the 34