"Preising" or "Squeezing which is making jugs turenes &c. of the clay. ready for being tired. The division of labour in pottery in 1827. These illustrations, showing mould making, engraving for transfers, modelling and mould pressing, are from a book that illustrated eighteen distinct stages, carried out by different people, in the production of pots. By the early nineteenth century, a complete division of labour was accepted in the potteries. From A Representation of the Manufacture of Earthenware, published by Ambrose Cuddon, London, 1827. \*Farrer, vol. I, pp.190-191. Engraving designs on Copper Plates for producing the much admired blue printed pots", &c. potteries had little idea of the sorts of effect that were required of them as well as being generally reluctant to abandon the traditional ideas that had been handed down to them about the proper form of pots. Wedgwood had constant difficulty in finding modellers who could design in the antique style, whether for his ornamental or his useful wares. A letter from Wedgwood in 1767 describes well the kind of problems he often had with his modellers: 'I have recd. the Terrine model & mould, the imperfections of which you describ'd so justly in your last letter that I need only say your acct. of them was not exagerated, & I fear Mr. Chubbard will not be of much use to us, which I am the more concern'd for, as he seems so well dispos'd to do his best for us . . . 'The Terrine is capitally defective in point of truth in the form of all the ends & sides which do not correspond at all with each other, there is the same fault in the ornamts. & likewise in the top of the dish, & the Cover. The carv'd ornaments are not finish'd, & the whole shews such a want of that Masterliness necessary in the execution of these works, as quite discourages me from thinking of employing him again as a modeler.'\* Ultimately Wedgwood solved the problem by employing artists from outside the pottery industry to do the modelling. Understanding the principles of neo-classicism, these artists could use them to give modern products the character of the antique. At 35