\*Farrer, vol. II, p. 171. \*Wedgwood to Bentley, quoted in John Flaxman R.A., catalogue of exhibition at the Royal Academy, London, 1979, p.47. first, Wedgwood employed artist modellers at his works, but he found them very troublesome. Their sense of artistic independence made them disinclined to follow the strict routine he expected of his other workmen, and they threatened the discipline and standards of work he was trying to enforce. Of this problem, Wedgwood wrote on one occasion: 'Oh! for a dozen good & humble modellers at Etruria for a couple of months. What creations, renovations, & generations shod. we make! Well - fair & softly, we must proceed with our own natural forces, for I will have no more fine modellers here, though I seem to wish for them, they would corrupt & ruin us all. I have been oblig'd to part with Radford. The hours he chose to work would, by the example, have ruin'd ten times better men than himself.'\* Wedgwood's experiences with artists in his factory convinced him that he should not employ them in the works, but commission or buy designs from them. It was on this basis that he dealt with John Flaxman, who worked in London and sent his designs to Etruria. The operation of designing thus became not just separate but also geographically removed from the manufacture of the pots. Wedgwood evidently understood that there were commercial advantages in employing artists to design his wares. As the middle and upper classes established stronger self-identity, they sought to distinguish themselves by exclusive and fashionable tastes of their own. Provincial craftsmen from the working class could not help being ignorant of these fashions, and Wedgwood was compelled to find men who had connections with society and the ruling taste. In a letter to Bentley, he made it clear that he believed that customers would rate the work of Academicians more highly than that of ordinary plaster-cast makers, like John Flaxman's father, who is referred to here: 'I wrote to you in my last concerning Busts, I suppose those at the Academy are less hackneyed and better in General than the plaister shops can furnish us with: besides it will sound better to say this is from the Academy, taken from an original in the Gallery of etc. etc. than to say we had it from Flaxman.'\* Although the demands of neo-classicism gave Wedgwood a particular reason for making use of artists to design his products, the introduction of designing as a specialist activity has been general to the development of all manufactures, going hand in hand with the division of labour. Otherwise, without a set of instructions to guide the craftsman, the manufacture of any article would have had all the unpredictability of a game of consequences as one man after another added his labour to it. Whether the design was prepared by a craftsman who worked for the rest of his time at some other job in the factory, or whether it was prepared by an artist or professional designer living in a distant town and conversant with the latest fashionable tastes and ideas, the nature of the work was the same and owed its origins to the same cause. Though the professional designer might have been able to conceive a very much more stylish and marketable product, the fact that there was work for him to do was the result not of his inventive genius, but of the division of labour in the factory. 36