Design and the Labour Process: the Elimination of Chance \*Herwin Schaefer, The Roots of Modern Design, London, 1970, \*See J. Thomas. Once a manufacturer had had a design prepared for his products, it was natural that he should want it reproduced as exactly as possible. Much could be done by the designer himself to ensure that his work was of a kind that the craftsmen, with the skills and tools they had, would be able to reproduce accurately and consistently. In almost every industry, one of the first conditions a design had to fulfil was that it should give consistent results in its execution, for a product in which there were haphazard variations would rightly be judged a failure. Almost all designs have therefore had characteristics that were arrived at in order to use the available means of production - machines or workmen's hands in such a way that chance and variation would be eliminated. Most histories of design in which Wedgwood's Queensware has been discussed have stressed its neo-classicism. Certainly, Wedgwood was concerned that his pots should have a neo-classical appearance, but his particular type of neo-classicism was related to the way in which the pots were made and to the organisation of his factory. Some historians of design have suggested that the smooth, regular forms of Queensware were the result of mechanical methods of production: for instance, Herwin Schaefer stated in The Roots of Modern Design that Queensware was 'perfected and standardized in shapes to be easily produced by mechanical means'. Obsessed though Schaefer and other historians have been by the notion that the introduction of machines must have been the main cause of changes in design, there is no evidence of any mechanical revolution in the pottery industry in Wedgwood's time to justify Schaefer's description. The techniques of throwing, moulding and turning Queensware were exactly the same as had been used for greenware and for that matter, throughout the pottery industry for at least thirty years before Wedgwood went into business. Although he did introduce a mechanically driven turning lathe, which has been made much of by historians, turning was in Mould for cauliflower teapot, c.1760. Making moulds was expensive, and the range of pots was limited to the number of different moulds. 37