Josiah Wedgwood: page from pattern book of enamel decorations for Queensware, c. 1780. Customers could choose from a wide range of decoration on a limited number of shapes. \*Mankowitz, p.57. designs and for the variety of glaze effects. However, the unpredictability of the glazes made the wares unsuitable for sale by samples and catalogues. The production of many moulded designs was costly because of the capital cost of all the moulds that were required and the time that was wasted by the workmen in shifting from one design to another. In a letter to Bentley, written when he was trying to lower his workmen's piece rates, Wedgwood referred to these problems: 'I have had several serious Talks with our Men at the Ornamental works lately about the price of our workmanship, and the necessity of lowering it, especially in Flowerpots, Bowpots, and Teapots, and as I find their chief reason against lowering their prices is the small quantitys made of each, which creates them as much trouble in tuneing their fiddle as playing the tune, I have promised them that they shall make dozens and Groces of Flower, and Teapots, and of the Vases and Bowpots too, as often as we dare venture at such quantitys . . . I have now got a book for my own use and speculation, with the prices of workmanship of every article, I shall proceed in the same way where I think there is room for it, and the infallible consequence of lowering the price of workmanship will be a proportional increase of quantity got up; and if you turn to the columns of Calculation and see how large a share Modeling and Moulds and the three next columns bear in the expence of Manufacturing our goods, and consider that these expences move on like clockwork, and are much the same whether the quantity of goods made be large or small, you will see the vast consequence in most manufactures of making the greatest quantity possible in a given time.'\* In the ornamental wares, to which this letter referred, the quantities produced were nothing like as great as in the useful wares, where even larger economies could be made by reducing the number of designs. To achieve such a reduction, while still satisfying his customers' demands for variety, Wedgwood decided in the Queensware to limit the number of shapes but to offer a wide choice of enamelled decoration, which was applied to the pots after they had been fired, a relatively simple process. 29