Josiah Wedgwood: Queensware plates, tureen, bowl and covered dish decorated in crimped ribbon and wreath design, c. 1780. The same, or similar basic shapes, could be decorated in very different patterns. www. \*Jeffrey Meikle, Twentieth Century Limited, Philadelphia, 1979, p. 39. to make the Queensware designs suitable for a wide variety of enamelled patterns, plain and simple shapes with large expanses of smooth surface were needed. It so happened that neo-classical forms satisfied this requirement very much better than the rococo ones that Wedgwood and other manufacturers had been producing. The development of forms that both suited the methods of manufacture and satisfied the tastes of the market was the work of design. It would not have been enough for the designs just to have appealed to eighteenth-century middle and upper-class taste, or just to have been such that the craftsmen could be relied on to repeat them consistently: the achievement of Wedgwood's modellers was to arrive at forms which satisfactorily fused the requirements of both production and consumption. In this, the modellers were occupied in exactly the same task as every subsequent designer. It is often said that industrial design is a new, specifically twentieth-century occupation. For instance Jeffrey Meikle states in his book about design in America between the two World Wars, Twentieth Century Limited, that industrial design came into existence as a result of the depression: 'Industrial design was born of a lucky conjunction of a saturated market, which forced manufacturers to distinguish their products from others, and a new machine style, which provided motifs easily applied by designers and recognized by a sensitized public as "modern"."\* Certainly a group of professional industrial designers did emerge in America in the 1920s, but it is wrong to suppose (whatever they themselves claimed) that these were the first industrial designers. The activity that men like Raymond Loewy and Henry Dreyfuss were engaged in had existed in certain industries for well over a century, and the only novel things about their work were the ideas they brought to the job and the products they were called upon to design, from automobiles to radio sets and retractable ball-point pens. In all fundamental respects, the nature of their work, fusing ideas with manufacturing techniques, was identical to that of Wedgwood's humble modellers in the potteries. 41