3. Design and Mechanisation Was Machinery Bad for Design? \*Nikolaus Pevsner, Pioneers of Modern Design, 3rd edition, Harmondsworth, 1960, pp.42-43. \*Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1836, vol. IX, para. 1431. It has long been the convention to see mid-Victorian design as degenerate and to blame this on the introduction of machine manufacture. In Pioneers of Modern Design, probably the single most widely read book on modern design, Nikolaus Pevsner described the state of mid-Victorian design as follows: 'It was not only that the machine had stamped out taste in industrial products; by 1850 it seems that it had irremediably poisoned the surviving craftsmen . . . Why was this bound to come? The usual answer because of industrial growth and the invention of machines "“ is correct, but as a rule taken too superficially . . . The development from simple mechanical devices to modern wonders of machinery was logical and gradual. Why did the machine in the end become so disastrous to art? The transition from the mediaeval to the modern state of applied art was reached somewhere about the end of the eighteenth century.'\* Pevsner goes on to list the well-known sequence of mechanical inventions of the industrial revolution, encouraging us to believe that they were the cause of the deterioration in design. But could inanimate, senseless machines have had anything to do with the quality of design and were they really the cause of all the evils attributed to them? And is the historical process which Pevsner outlined in Pioneers of Modern Design an accurate account of the development of design in industry? In his account of the degeneration of mid-Victorian design, Pevsner has followed closely the statements of those who saw the changes at first hand. The subject was much discussed in the nineteenth century, with repeated references to the evil influence of machines. A typical remark, though unusually early in its date (1835), is by the architect C.R. Cockerell: 'I believe that the attempt to supersede the work of the mind and hand by mechanical process for the sake of economy will always have the effect of degrading and ultimately ruining art.'\* Similar opinions were expressed by many others, among them John Ruskin, Richard Redgrave, editor of the Journal of Design which was published between 1848 and 1852, and William Morris. Within a short time, Cockerell's belief that machines led to inferior design had become widely accepted as incontrovertible truth. Thus Charles Eastlake could write with absolute conviction in his book Hints on Household Taste, which was published in 1868: 'Every lady recognises the superiority of hand-made lace and other textile fabrics over those which are produced by artificial means.