\*Charles Eastlake, Hints on Household Taste, reprinted Ontario, 1969, pp. 104-105. \*Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, New York, 1948, p.352. \*R. Samuel, 'The Workshop of the World', History Workshop Journal, no.3, Spring 1977, pp. 5-72. \*L. Weatherill, The Pottery Trade and North Staffordshire 1660-1760, Manchester, 1971, chapter 5. \*Karl Marx, Capital, vol. I, Part 4. References are to the Pelican edition, Harmondsworth, 1976. The same criterion of excellence may be applied to almost every branch of art-manufacture. The perfect finish and accurate uniformity of shape - the correct and even balance which distinguish European goods from those of Eastern nations, and English goods especially from those of other countries in Europe - indicate degrees not only of advanced civilization, but, inversely, of decline in taste.'\* The arguments put forward by the nineteenth-century design reformers and followed by Pevsner rested upon an assumption that machines had usurped the craftsman's control over the form of the product: the effect of machines, they believed, had been to change the practice of design by separating responsibility for the appearance of a product from the tasks of fabricating it, with the consequence that the quality of design had deteriorated. So strongly was this idea held that one of the main purposes of the Great Exhibition of 1851 was to demonstrate the truth of it: the intention of Henry Cole, the principal organiser of the exhibition, was to display machine-made products alongside the hand-made goods of India and the Orient so that the simplicity and superiority of design of the latter would be there for all to see.\* Yet despite the wide acceptance of the ideas embodied in the Great Exhibition, machines could not possibly have been the cause of the much denigrated specialisation in the work of design, which was already established long before the development of mechanised production. At no point did machines alone have any independent influence upon design. It is the persistence of Victorian writers' misunderstanding and prejudices that, even today, brings us back to the hoary old theme of the effect of machines on the quality of design. The histories of three nineteenth-century British industries calico printing, dress making and cabinet making - illustrate particularly well the actual relationship between the appearance of finished products and the machines used in their manufacture. It is important to remember that the extent of mechanisation in mid-nineteenth-century industries was far less than was, and still is, often supposed. As Raphael Samuel has shown, the manufacture of a great many products relied for a long time on the manual skill and strength of workmen.\* Even where machines were introduced, they were rarely applied to all the stages of production, and many processes continued to be carried out by hand: for instance in tailoring and dress making, until late in the century, machines were employed only for a few types of sewing. Of all British manufacturing industries in the middle of the nineteenth century, only textile production had been extensively mechanised. In the many industries that continued to be based on manual labour, products were still not necessarily made from start to finish by the same craftsmen: for example, the division of labour in the unmechanised pottery industry goes back as far as the early eighteenth century and it appeared in many other industries around the same time.\* This pattern corresponds closely to the three stages of the development of capitalist manufacture described by Karl Marx in Capital.\* After the initial condition of pre-capitalist societies, in which artefacts were made by individual craftsmen working on their own, Marx identified the first phase of capitalism as the simple co-operation of workers, who might, for example, 43