\*Marx, p.482. \*Marx, p.483. \*Marx, p.572. \*Marx, pp.548-549. \*Select Committee on the Copyight of Designs, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1840, vol. VI, para. 3062. share a workshop and purchase their materials and sell their goods collectively. In the second stage, the different tasks of hand manufacture were divided among the workmen under the direction of a master; the third stage came about with the introduction of machinery and the establishment of the factory system. In many British industries, the second stage, the division of labour in handicraft manufacture, took place in the eighteenth century: it was as the individual craftsman lost control of the complete process that the new and separate activity of design became necessary. Marx was referring to this stage when he wrote: 'The knowledge, judgement and will which, even though to a small extent, are exercised by the independent peasant or handicraftsman, in the same way as the savage makes the whole art of war consist in the exercise of his personal cunning, are faculties now only required for the workshop as a whole.'\* Marx went on to quote the Scottish philosopher Adam Ferguson (1725-1826) on the advantages of ignorance for successful manufactures: 'Ignorance is the mother of industry as well as of superstition. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand or the foot is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may . . . be considered as an engine, the parts of which are men.'\* Writing in 1767, Ferguson closely anticipated Josiah Wedgwood's remarks about 'making machines of the men'. It was at the second handicraft stage of industry that design, as the drawing up of instructions, became necessary in order to direct the ignorance of the workmen. The introduction of machines, Marx later explains, made further changes both in the kinds of labour used (women and children rather than skilled artisans) and in the way it was used (to mind and regulate machines rather than for skill in production), but it had no effect on the essential characteristics of the process of which design was already a part. According to Marx: 'Machine production drives the social division of labour immeasurably further than manufacture does, because it increases the productive power of the industries it seizes upon to a much greater degree.' Elsewhere he wrote: 'The separation of the intellectual faculties of the production process from manual labour, and the transformation of those faculties into powers exercised by capital over labour, is . . . finally completed by large-scale industry erected on the foundation of machinery." This excursion into theory can be illustrated and substantiated by events in the history of calico printing, an industry in which design was of the greatest importance, since the commercial success of printed cotton relied almost entirely upon the appeal of the pattern. As one manufacturer asked, '. . . what is it that makes the trade at all? Is it not the design upon the fabric, and the colour upon it, and the invention of art that is put upon it; if you put more and better of all these things, you will have more trade.'\* 44