\*On the history of calico printing, see G. Turnbull, A History of the Calico Printing Industry of Great Britain, Altrincham, 1951; English Printed Textiles 1720-1836, catalogue, Victoria & Albert Museum, London, 1960 (text by P. Floud); and G. Dodd, The Textile Manufactures of Great Britain, London, 1844, pp. 58-60. \*Minutes of Evidence on the Calico Printers' Petitition, Parliamentary Papers, 1806-07, vol. II, p. 14. Engraving wooden blocks for textile printing in eighteenthcentury France. This was the original method of printing fabrics. From 'Arts et Métiers Méchaniques', Encyclopédie Méthodique des Arts et Métiers, n.d., vol. 8, plate 5. Because cotton was such a major industry in nineteenth-century Britain, the design of printed cottons received a great deal of public attention around the middle of the century. The technique of printing cotton from engraved wooden blocks was developed in the late seventeenth century.\* In the 1750s, a new technique was developed, using engraved copper plates, which were larger than the wooden blocks and could carry more detail. Whichever method was used, the printing itself was done by hand: the cloth was stretched out on a long table, and the printer worked along it, pressing the block or plate down upon the cloth, and inking it between each impression. Considerable skill was required in applying the correct quantity of ink, in registering the block accurately and in applying the right amount of pressure. The process was a slow one: it was said that one printer could not print more than six pieces of cloth a day (one piece equals 28 yards). By 1800, both the drawing of the designs and the cutting or engraving of the blocks had become entirely separate occupations from printing, and each craft had its own apprenticeship. In 1804, it was said that at Church Bank in Lancashire, 58 journeymen block cutters and 23 pattern drawers had entered the trade in the last 23 years. Even while the printing was still done by hand, the designing of patterns had already become a separate occupation. Although the introduction of engraved copper plates had made some difference to the appearance of calico prints, in permitting more detail and larger patterns with each impression, it had made no difference to the organisation of labour in the works. However, in 1796 came another technical development: the engraved plates were made into rollers, and it became possible to print an entire length of cotton continuously in a single mechanical process. The first roller printing machines were driven by water power,