Roller printing press for printed cottons, England, early. nineteenth century. Roller or cylinder printing accelerated the production of cotton prints enormously. Note the simplicity of the designs being printed. From E. Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain, London, 1835. \*Turnbull, p.83. \*J. Emerson Tennent, A Treatise on the Copyright of Designs for Printed Fabrics, London, 1841, p.23. \*The Rise and Progress of Great Manufactories by the Proprietors - Messrs. Hargreaves Calico Print Works at Broad Oak, Accrington', Journal of Design, vol. III, no. 15, May 1850, p.79. but it was not long before the introduction of steam made a much more rapid rate of production possible. Where it had been possible to print only six pieces a day on a single table, a steam-powered roller printing machine could print up to 500 pieces a day. Between 1796 and 1840, as a result of the introduction of these machines, the annual production of printed textiles in the United Kingdom increased from one million pieces to sixteen million pieces. Hand printing by blocks and plates continued and still survives, but only for specialised and highly detailed work. In 1840, there were 435 printing machines in the country and 8,234 printing tables; ten years later however, there were only 3,939 tables, while the number of machines had increased to 604.\* While hand printing declined, bringing considerable hardship among the craftsmen, the greatly increased output of printed cottons provided a growing demand for new designs, and the occupation of pattern drawing, already well established in the handicraft period of the industry, continued to flourish. In 1841, it was estimated that in Manchester alone 500 people were working as designers of printed cottons. Some were employed in-house by the cotton masters; others worked freelance and sold their patterns to printers. A few designers, usually artists who had taken to drawing patterns, were retained by manufacturers on an annual salary, but it was more common for pattern designers to be employed on a weekly wage. Of all the employees in calico printing they received the highest average wages. At one factory in 1850, the top wage for a designer was 60 shillings a week, while the rate for the next most highly paid trade, engraving, was no more than 50 shillings.\* The practice of the print masters was to have large numbers of designs prepared but to engrave and print only a few. One large Manchester manufacturer said that in 1838 his pattern drawers 47