\*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1840, vol. VI, para. 105. \*Select Committee on Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 108, 2085, 2879. \*Select Committee on Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 4646-47. \*Tennent, p.31. had prepared between two and three thousand designs, of which only five hundred had been engraved and printed.\* This apparent extravagance and wastefulness was possible because the designs cost so little in comparison to the cost of engraving the cylinders and printing the cloth. In the Report of the Select Committee on Design of 1840, different manufacturers gave estimates of the proportion that the cost of design bore to the total cost of production. Various manufacturers estimated the cost of preparing a design at between five pounds and fifteen pounds.\* One large manufacturer reckoned that design cost him between 2d. and 3/4d. per piece, while another said that it cost him 1/192 (0.52%) of the cost of the cloth and represented 1/352 (0.28%) of the selling price.\* It is worth pointing out that in spite of these infinitesimal costs, the value of the design to the manufacturer was very great. The cotton print masters relied for their profit on the volume of sales from the individual machine-printed designs, and the commercial success or failure of a particular print depended almost entirely on the popularity of the design. One manufacturer estimated that a single successful design had been worth between £200 and £300 in the receipts it had brought him.\* On an initial outlay of not more than fifteen pounds, this was a handsome profit. Because machine printing greatly increased the quantity of cloth that could be printed from a single pattern, it made a successful design far more valuable to manufacturers than could ever have been the case with hand printing. It is not surprising that it was in the 1830s Design for a cotton print, watercolour on paper, with a sample of the cotton printed from the design, English, early nineteenth century. The designs were drawn out to a large scale and reproduced for engraving. Manufacturers had hundreds of such designs produced, only a few of which were engraved and printed. 48