and 1840s, when machine printing began to expand rapidly, that manufacturers first became concerned to protect ownership of their designs. The major print masters began to campaign in the early 1830s for the copyright laws to be extended to cover designs for printed cottons, and, although other justifications, such as the argument that it would lead to better design, were put forward for copyright, the main object of the print masters was to establish their proprietorship over designs as a source of wealth. The debates over copyright gave rise to a great deal of discussion on other aspects of design. However, the new attention that was being paid to design did not mean that designing was a new activity or even that its essential nature had lately changed in any way because of the introduction of machines. Nevertheless, the view was sometimes expressed that the hand printed textiles of the early decades of the century were superior to the cylinderprinted designs of the 1830s and 1840s. Richard Redgrave put forward two reasons in the official report on design in the Great Exhibition of 1851 to account for what he saw as a deterioration in quality. His first point was that: 'Wherever ornament is wholly effected by machinery, it is certainly the most degraded in style and execution; and the best workmanship and the best taste are to be found in those manufactures and fabrics wherein handicraft is entirely or partially the means of producing the ornament . . .'\* \*Great Exhibition of 1851, Jury Reports, vol. IV, 'Supplementary Report on Design to Class XXX', pp.710-711. Printed cotton, English, 1850. This complex, illusionistic design, of the kind criticised by Redgrave, would have been printed by roller for the flat areas of colour and by plate for the detail. જિ 49