useny Rearns lo. Sorter, 2. estal heat and dining 25 menalit (whil Cotton print samples in the record book of H. Fieldlong & Bros., dated 12th February 1824. This book records dye recipes and printing processes. These simple, repeat patterns of the kind admired by Redgrave were printed by roller. \*Great Exhibition of 1851, Jury Reports, vol. IV, p.745. \*Manuscript record book of H. Fieldlong & Bros of dye recipes and printing processes, datd 12th February 1824, Victoria & Albert Museum, Department of Textiles, 712-1956. 712-1956 What Redgrave liked were products in which the craftsmen had influenced the design, or been able to introduce variety; yet, if this had ever been the case in calico printing, it had ceased to be long before the nineteenth century, and certainly was not true of the patterns of the 1820s that he so admired. Redgrave's second reason for inferiority concerned the introduction of cylinder printing: 'The restrained use of means has often been adverted to ... under the old and simple methods of cotton printing, when the resources were few and the means were limited, the style was in some respects better than at present obtains... Thus block printing by hand required flat forms and flat tints diapered regularly over the surface, and some simple flower or leaf so used had a pleasing and just effect. . . In the place, however, of the former limited means, printing from metal cylinders has put at the command of the designer all those powers of more perfect imitation enjoyed by the engraver, and, instead of using them as they should be used, consistently with the requirements of manufacture and the principles of ornamental art, they are wasted on the imitation of flowers, foliage and accidents of growth, quite out of ornamental character and opposed to just principles.'\* Again Redgrave's analysis was at fault, for the 'restraint' he associated with block printing had been superseded, not by cylinder printing, but by the earlier invention of copper plate printing, which had been introduced in the handicraft stage of the industry. Far from offering 'more perfect imitation', cylinder printing, if anything, provided less, because the problems of register made it unsuited to designs with many colours. The evidence from calico printers' record books shows that during the 1820s it was the simpler patterns of the kind that Redgrave admired and thought to be handicraft products that were printed by cylinder, and the more complex, fussier ones of which he disapproved that were hand-printed. Even by the 1850s, when Redgrave was expressing these opinions, most cylinder-printed designs were still fairly