thul 18th 1824 Found / (Mch & Broke musling Hammered Bet's prenten & Chest by Cylinder 824 Juirfile by the Block And cun Groundedn hung Jclays Colet room Kr themelung of these on 227 page Back 3/ ã ® "‹Hand And 12. praes Dratin 12th of XXX Emader & 80.50fübilning Zhows. bring to 170. Back t Cotton print samples in the record book of H. Fieldlong & Bros., dated 12th February 1824. Left: A design printed by roller (for the large flat areas) and block (for the detail). Right: One of the most complex designs printed entirely by block, the hand process that Redgrave mistakenly believed produced simplicity in design. The Mechanical Fallacy: Fashion and Furniture \*Many of Mayhew's original letters were reprinted in his London Labour and the London Poor, 4 vols, 1860; a further selection is contained in The Unknown Mayhew, E.P. Thompson and E. Yeo, Harmondsworth, 1973. The latter is particularly relevant to this chapter since it contains the bulk of the coverage of the needleworkers and the cabinet makers simple, with rarely more than two colours, while many of the more ornate designs that were castigated by the organisers of the Great Exhibition were printed either entirely by hand from blocks and plates, or by a combination of block and cylinder. If the deterioration in design that Redgrave and others perceived was not the result of mechanisation, we have to ask what caused the changes they saw and go on to consider why they insisted on attributing them to the introduction of machines. To find explanations for changes in design, we have to look beyond the machines themselves to the social system in which they were used. In the effects both of the sewing machine upon costume design and of machine-cut veneers upon cabinet making, the crucial factor can be shown to be the particular characteristics of the relationship of labour to capital in the respective industries. The system of garment manufacture on the eve of the introduction of the sewing machine was described by Henry Mayhew in his letters to the Morning Chronicle in 1849.\* According to Mayhew, tailoring and dressmaking in London were divided into 'honourable' and 'dishonourable' sections. The 'honourable' section survived in establishments where only fully qualified journeymen were employed, mostly on a regular basis; they produced the highest quality of work, worked on the masters' premises, and were paid at piece rates on an agreement between masters and journeymen known as 'the log'. The forms of employment in the 51