## Above: Dressmaking workshop, 1850s. The state of exhaustion of the seamstresses suggests a sweatshop. From The British Workman and Friend of the Sons of Toil, September 1858. Right: Sweated tailor, 1850s. The man is working in his home, on garments that have been put out to him by a sweater. From The British Workman and Friend of the Sons of Toil, October 1855. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p. 140. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.265. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.141. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.218. 'dishonourable' section were very different. The 'dishonourable' trade included tailors and dressmakers working casually for large tailoring and dressmaking establishments that were short of hands, but it consisted mainly of 'sweated' workers. Under the sweating system, tailoring or dressmaking houses put work out to a 'sweater', usually a journeyman, who contracted for the sewing of a quantity of garments. The sweater in turn put the work out to needleworkers at rates of pay much below those of the 'log'. The work was sometimes done in the workers' own homes, but increasingly in a workshop provided by the sweater. Mayhew quoted one sweated tailor's description of the system: 'The master here . . . gets work from the warehouse at the beforementioned prices; he gives it out to us at the same price, paying us when he receives the money. We are never seen at the shop [i.e. the warehouse]. Out of the prices the master here deducts 4s. per week per head for our cup of tea or coffee in the morning, and tea in the evening, and our bed.'\* In this case the sweater apparently made no profit out of the sewing itself, but only out of the deductions for food and lodging. Most sweaters, however, gave their workers a lower rate than they received on the completed goods; it was said that the sweater's normal rate of profit was two shillings in the pound on completed garments. The sweaters were effectively small capitalists who made their money out of the labour of the tailors and dressmakers working for them. Their capital consisted of the security, usually at least five pounds, which they had to give to the tailoring houses or wholesale warehouses on receipt of the cloth.\* It was the lack of even this small amount of capital that prevented the majority of needleworkers from getting work direct from the warehouses and compelled them to work for the sweaters. By 1849, an estimated six out of seven London garment workers were employed in the dishonourable trade, either as casual or as sweated workers, making ready-made shirts and outer wear for the large ready-to-wear men's clothing shops, and uniforms and liveries.\* The introduction of the sewing machine caused no fundamental change in the industry. Machines first became commercially available in 1851, and technical improvements over the next few years made them relatively efficient by the end of the decade. The 52