\*Royal Commission on Children's Employment, Second Report, Parliamentary Papers, 1864, vol.XXII, p. 163. \*Royal Commission on Children's Employment, 1864, para.410. \*For further discussion of the impact of the sewing machine, see Marx, vol. I, pp.601-604. \*The Unknown Mayhew, p.232. evidence to the Royal Commission on Childrens' Employment in 1864 shows that sewing machines were in widespread use by then.\* Most were bought by sweatmasters and installed in their workshops, as few individual workers could afford them. Because the sewing machine greatly increased the needleworker's output, it was to his or her advantage to seek a place in a workshop where machines were provided, accelerating the trend towards the employment of workers in workshops rather than in their own homes.\* Although manufacturers began to hire out sewing machines for one or two shillings a week, in theory allowing individual needleworkers to be their own masters and independent of the sweatshops, this was of little help to the workers, who still lacked the necessary capital to deal direct with the warehouses.\* The sewing machine, then, made no structural difference to the relationship between workers, sweaters and masters, except in tending to make needleworkers more dependent on the sweaters who provided the sewing machines. What the sewing machine did not do was further diminish the amount of control that individual garment workers had upon the form and appearance of garments. Evidence from the Royal Commission on Childrens' Employment and elsewhere shows that a division of labour between cutting and sewing, and between the sewing of various parts of garments was already well established before the introduction of sewing machines. A journeyman very rarely both designed and made a garment himself; it is because this was so unusual that Mayhew quotes one tailor as saying he had 'made a waistcoat of my own invention.'\* In general, the pattern and cut of garments was still determined by the masters and retail shops, just as it had been before the introduction of the sewing machine. However, it did appear to some contemporaries that the sewing machine had affected the design of clothes, but the reasoning here needs close examination. Because the sewing machine could not be used for the whole process of making clothes, some parts of the sewing of a garment became cheaper than others. The early sewing machines were good only for sewing flat seams and for sewing on trimmings. Machines for the blind stitching of hems, for buttonholing and for sewing on buttons were not developed until towards the end of the nineteenth century. Until then, these tasks had to be carried out by hand, even if the main seams of the garment could be machine sewn. It was only to be expected that garment manufacturers would want to exploit the parts of the process cheapened by the machine and to reduce as much as possible the more laborious and costly work of hand finishing. In women's dresses, the effect of the machines was greatly to increase the amount of trimming that could be applied to dresses for the same cost. A Cheltenham dressmaker giving evidence to the Royal Commission on Childrens' Employment stated: 'I have three machines. I should like every dressmaker to use them; they save much labour, and also enable you to pay at a higher rate those whom you employ, whether machinist or finisher. Much more work can be put in too; we should never put 100 yards of trimming in a summer dress, if it were all to be done by hand; the pleating up and finishing must still be hand-work; and we find it best to have different machines for different work, 53