\*Royal Commission on Children's Employment, 1864, vol. XXII, p.202, para.88. \*Quoted by C. W. & P. Cunnington, Handbook of English Costume in the Nineteenth Century, London, 1959, p.486. \*Cunnington, p.487. just as with hand-workers, one will do the sleeves, another the skirts and a third the bodies.'\* The great increase in the quantity of trimmings had its effect upon women's fashions. Dresses of the 1860s and early 1870s were loaded with trimmings: it seems that a hundred yards per dress was no exaggeration. Contemporary writers on fashion noted this development, and by the early 1870s had begun to deplore it. One wrote: 'What . . . will characterize the present epoch in the History of Fashion... is the amount of trimming with which we have found it possible to load every separate article.'\* It was supposed that the fashion was due to the sewing machine: 'We owe much of the over-trimming now prevalent to the facilities afforded by the sewing machine.'\* Convincing though this explanation may seem, it was valid only because sewing machines had been introduced into a capitalist system of manufacture. One of the main objects of the sweatmasters and clothing wholesalers, who controlled their use, was to cheapen the price of sewing. In other circumstances, the speed of the machines could have allowed the machinists to earn more or to work for only a few hours a day instead of the twelve or more that were customary for hand sewers. To the customer, the cost of Fashion plate, c. 1860, showing the heavily trimmed dresses that were fashionable, and which contemporaries wrongly attributed to the introduction of the sewing machine.