\*George Gifford, 'Argument of Gifford in Favor of the Howe Application for Extension of Patent', New York, United States Patent Office, 1860, referred to in Grace Rogers Cooper, The Sewing Machine, Its Invention and Development, 2nd edition, Washington D.C., 1976, p.58. \*See The Unknown Mayhew, pp.432-482. \*See, for example, the description of his shop in Liverpool by James Hopkinson, Victorian Cabinet Maker, edited by J.B. Goodman, London, 1968, p.96. \*London Labour and the London Poor, p.228. the sewing could have continued the same, and all the advantages would have been to the worker. There would then have been no virtue in designing dresses with great lengths of elaborate trimmings, since they would only have been more expensive. However, rather than paying the machinists at the same rate as the hand sewers, the sweaters actually paid them only a fraction of what the hand sewers received for an equivalent amount of sewing. In the United States, where circumstances were similar, a shirt factory in New Haven, Connecticut, paid its hand sewers in 1860 at the rate of 622 cents per shirt, but when sewing machines were installed, the machinists received only 163 cents for each shirt.\* To earn as much as hand sewers or, as was usual, slightly more (in this particular factory, machinists were paid four dollars per week compared to the hand sewers' three dollars), the machinists had to work almost as long hours. Of the money that the sweater or dressmaker saved, part went to pay the cost of the machine, part went to increase profits, but most went to reduce the price of sewing to the customer, so that more sewing could be put into a dress at no additional cost. Thus the ultimate cause of the fashion for heavily trimmed dresses was not now the sewing machine itself, but its use within a capitalist system of manufacture. Like the garment industry, the furniture industry in mid-nineteenth century London was divided into an 'honourable' section of men in regular employment, paid at agreed rates, and a 'dishonourable section of self-employed men whose earnings were much lower and were determined by bargaining with the retailer for a price on each piece of furniture made.\* The large majority of cabinet makers were self-employed men, working on their own, assisted (if they had any assistance) most often by their wives and children. Known as garretmasters, these men were indeed their own masters, but since they usually had no capital apart from their tools, and their livelihood depended upon selling each piece of furniture immediately they had made it, most of them were extremely poor. They generally made their furniture speculatively, carting it when it was finished to the West End to find a buyer among the furniture stores there. The stores were often accused of taking advantage of the garretmasters' desperate need for cash to beat them down to prices that hardly paid for their labour, for which the retailers earned themselves the name 'slaughterhouses'. Until about 1830, it seems that most furniture was made by journeymen employed in the workshops from which it was sold, and in many places outside London this continued to be common until much later in the century.\* There were also some masters, known as 'trade-working masters' who employed journeymen to make furniture which was sold wholesale to retail stores.\* However, between 1830 and 1850, the regular employment of cabinet makers declined, and more and more became garretmasters, who by 1850 outnumbered the former by ten to one. The change appears to have been caused by the rise of the large furniture retailers who had sufficient capital to hold stocks of furniture for some time, and found that their expenses were much reduced by not having to employ directly the men who made the furniture. Many of the slaughterhouses were said to be unconcerned about the quality of the furniture they sold, as long as it was superficially good enough to take in the customers. One garretmaster reported 55