\*London Labour and the London Poor, p.225. \*Morning Chronicle, 4th July 1850, p.6. \*London Labour and the London Poor, p.230. The Unknown Mayhew, p.477. to Mayhew that he had been told by a slaughterhouse: 'Make an inferior article so as it's cheap: if it comes to pieces in a month, what's that to you or me?' The garretmaster continued: 'There's no doubt of it that the linendrapers [furniture retailers] have brought bad work into the market, and have swamped the good. For work that ten or twelve years ago, I had £3 5s. to £3 10s. from them, I have now 30s. Of course it's inferior in quality in proportion . . .'\* Under the influence of the slaughterhouses, such 'scamping' became widespread. Garretmasters found themselves having to make twice as many pieces in the same time as men honourably employed in order to stay alive. Nothing made scamping easier than machine-cut veneers, which became available cheaply with the introduction of steam-powered circular saws in the 1830s. Previously, veneers, cut by the most skilled branch of the hand sawyers, had been relatively expensive and used only in high class cabinet work. However, as one old hand sawyer explained to Mayhew, the circular saw changed all this by cutting veneers thinner and faster: "They was cut more true than any sawyer could do them, but not half as well as they are now. The first that was done was eight to the inch, and now they can cut fourteen, as thin as a wafer, and that's impossible for the best sawyer in the world to do. I have cut as many as eight in the inch myself, but then the wood was very shallow eight or nine inches deep. The general run of veneers cut by hand was about six in the inch.'\* By 1850, when Mayhew recorded this statement, all veneers were cut by steam power, and their price was much reduced as a result. Machine-cut veneers were a boon to the garretmasters in their need to make superficially good furniture as cheaply as possible. Mayhew described how the garretmasters used them: 'The frequent use of rosewood veneers in the fancy cabinet, and their occasional use in the general cabinet trade, gives, I was told, great facilities for scamping. If, in his haste, the scamping hand injure the veneer, or if it has been originally faulty, he takes a mixture of gum shellac and "colour", (colour being a composition of Venetian red and lamp black) which he has already by him, rubs it over the damaged part, smooths it with a slightly heated iron, and so blends it with the colour of the rosewood that the warehouseman does not detect the flaw. Indeed, I was told that very few warehousemen are judges of the furniture they bought and they only require it to look well enough for sale to the public, who know even less than themselves.'\* Another garretmaster, talking about the production of ladies sewing boxes said: 'Such boxes are nailed together; there's no dove-tailing, nothing of what I call work or workmanship, as you say about them, but the deal's nailed together, and the veneer's dabbed on, and if the deal's covered, why the thing passes.'\* The use of veneers was especially singled out by those to whom Mayhew spoke, and by others involved in the furniture industry, as one of the reasons for the quality of furniture. In the hands of 56