Garretmaster, 1860. The garretmaster, who has just made the chest-of-drawers on the barrow behind, is negotiating a price for it with a furniture retailer. From H. Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor, 1861, vol. 3. BUTCH FORNIT Cheap Hand sawyer. Veneers, like all timber, were originally cut by two sawyers, one above and one below. The introduction of steam-powered circular saws made the craft redundant. From Book of English Trades, published by R. Phillips, 1823. \*Morning Chronicle, 8th August 1850, Letter LXIV, 'Fancy Cabinet Makers of London'. the garretmasters, cheap, machine-cut veneers allowed an enormous change in the appearance of low-quality furniture which, rather than being simply made of deal, could now have all the appearance of superior products. As one garretmaster said to Mayhew: 'I think that machinery has been a benefit to us: it increases the material for our work. If there wasn't so much veneering, there wouldn't be so much fancy cabinet work.'\* Although the veneer-cutting machinery facilitated the development of a new kind of furniture production, it would again be wrong to suppose that machinery was responsible for any deterioration in quality. As the garretmasters themselves told Mayhew, it was the growth of the slaughterhouses that had mainly caused the decline in standards, because the low prices they offered the cabinet makers encouraged scamping on a large scale. Machine-cut veneers provided just another means of scamping but were not themselves the cause of the practice. As with the sewing machine and dress making, it was not the machine itself that brought about 57