The Politics of Design \*On these various matters, see Quentin Bell, The Schools of Design, London, 1963; T. Kusamitsu, 'Great Exhibitions before 1851', History Workshop Journal, no.9, Spring 1980, pp. 70-89. changes in design, but the use of machinery under specific economic and social circumstances. Both garment manufacture and cabinet making involved a very simple level of technology and a relatively straightforward set of economic relations between capital and labour, but even when the technology is more complex, machinery alone has never determined the appearance of the goods. To attribute changes in design purely to technology is to misunderstand the nature both of machines and of design in industrial societies. The idea that machines had ruined design represented only a small part of a much larger debate during the 1830s and 1840s, a period when design became an issue of national political importance in Britain. It was the subject of three Parliamentary Select Committees, in 1835-36, 1840 and 1849; there was pressure to set up, and subsequently to improve, government-subsidised schools of design, there was a campaign to establish copyright over designs, and there were numerous exhibitions of art and design, culminating in the Great Exhibition of 1851, all organised with the intention of improving public taste and educating artisans.\* The underlying reason for this concern was that the development of machine production had made design very much more valuable to manufacturers. Maximising the sales from each design had not been so crucial in handicraft industries, where, although profit might depend on the volume of production, there was not necessarily any advantage in using a single design rather than a variety of different ones. In the hand printing of calico, for example, additional output required more tables, more printers and more blocks, but since each additional block had to be cut by hand, it made little difference if it was made to a new design or duplicated an existing one. The great advantage of machinery was its potential to manufacture a single design endlessly; the successful design became a very much more valuable possession, for it was what released the machine's capacity to make a profit. It was natural, therefore, that it was in the industries being mechanised in the second quarter of the nineteenth century that the greatest concern about design was shown, over both improving standards and protecting copyright. The timing of all this in the late 1830s and early 1840s can also be explained by the severe economic conditions of those years. In what was the first trade depression ever to affect the newly industrialised economy, manufacturers and political economists were anxious to know whether capitalist industry would survive at all and, more immediately, to ensure that Britain did not lose her share of world markets to foreign competitors. Although Britain was better equipped to produce consumer goods, particularly textiles, more cheaply and in greater quantity than any other country, there were fears that Britain's trading position was threatened by foreign competitors who could manufacture goods of superior design. Whether the competitors' products were in fact better designed is an open question; what mattered was that their design was different and many English people believed it to be superior. In the circumstances, the improvement of design seemed vital for Britain's economic survival and caused people to advocate remedies that were wholly contrary to the principles of classical economics and laissez faire which dominated politics at 58