\*N.W. Senior et al., On the Improvement of Designs and Patterns, and Extension of Copyright, London, 1841. \*Select Committee on Arts & Manufactures, Parliamentary Papers, 1836, vol. IX, para. 1593. \*Select Committee on Arts & Manufactures, 1836, vol. IX, para. 1598. to compromise their principles and recommend some legislative intervention in the interests of better design.\* The events of these years in some ways anticipated the much more extensive state involvement with design in Britain in the 1930s and 1940s, when similarly adverse economic conditions threatened the exports of manufactured goods. A major issue in the nineteenth-century debates was the cause of the apparent inferiority of British design. Two particular explanations appeared repeatedly and are worth looking at in order to understand the reasoning of those involved. One, the supposedly deleterious effect of mechanisation, has already been dealt with in this chapter; the second attributed the poor quality of design to the British workman's ignorance and lack of artistic ability. A great deal of weight was attached to this argument by some, who used it to justify setting up schools of design and organising exhibitions of art and design. Only, it was said, by educating artisans in the art of design, could any improvement in standards be looked for. This argument, too, needs to be approached with caution. There were people at the time who disagreed with it, and gave good grounds for doing so. In his evidence to the Select Committee on Arts and Manufactures in 1835, J.C. Robertson, the editor of the Mechanics' Magazine, pointed out that the argument was based on a misunderstanding of the nature of industry: in practice, it was unnecessary for artisans to have any design ability, since all that factory production required of them was the ability to execute the designs given to them. He added that he did not believe that there was any lack of ability among those concerned with design. When asked if designers were sufficiently instructed, he replied: 'I think they generally are sufficiently instructed. I have never met, in all my experience, any want of talent, in designing any branch of manufacture.'\* His own explanation for the inferiority of British design directed blame in an entirely different direction. Any superiority of French goods, he said, 'is owing to the talents of our artisans being employed in a more profitable direction than to any inferiority of taste in them. The great object with every English manufacturer is quantity; with him, that is always the best article to manufacture of which the largest supply is required; he prefers much a large supply at a low rate to a small supply at a higher; and that even should the present profit be less from the former than from the latter, because, in the long run, the larger the demand, the steadier it is sure to be. I do not think this is a point which has been sufficiently considered. From the great command of capital possessed by the English manufacturer, the immense capabilities of his machinery, and the unrivalled skill and industry of his workmen, he is enabled to turn out a greater quantity of goods in a given time than the manufacturer of any other country whatever.'\* Robertson was attributing bad design not to the workmen's lack of skill, but to the capitalist system of manufacture, which always put quantity and profit before quality. Although his explanation anticipated what William Morris later had to say about the causes of bad design, the argument was not to be found in the other 60