\*Art and Its Producers', Collected Works of William Morris, vol. XXII, London, 1914, p.352. evidence given to the Select Committee and hardly appears in the rest of the mid-century literature on the subject. In general, other writers and design reformers chose to concern themselves almost exclusively with such peripheral subjects as artisans' lack of artistic skill and the influence of machines. What the critics of design were unable to see or refused to acknowledge, was that capitalist manufacture, itself the cause of the specialised work of design becoming necessary, was simultaneously responsible for the quality of design deteriorating. Yet the artists, architects and intellectuals who involved themselves in design reform in the mid-nineteenth century, were far too closely associated with industrial and commercial wealth to dare venture on such a radical line of criticism. While many of them disliked the effects of industry, they had no alternative conception of what an industrial society could be like, and it was thus extremely difficult for them to make any criticism of their own society that did not threaten the source of their own prosperity. Short of abandoning all the material progress of the previous century and a half and returning to a simple handicraft economy (which was very much what John Ruskin recommended), they could envisage no way of building a society with an abundance of wealth, but without the concomitant evils. Only a socialist like William Morris was in a position to see that criticism of industrial society need not necessarily be regressive and that there could be an alternative which did not preclude material progress. It was therefore open to Morris, through his socialism, to blame the poor quality of design upon the greed of capitalism when others hesitated, or were unable, to do so. Although Morris disliked mechanisation and thought its products ugly, he did not insist that it was the sole cause of inferior design. As he said in one lecture: 'It is not this or that tangible steel and brass machine which we want to get rid of, but the great intangible machine of commercial tyranny, which oppresses the lives of all of us.'\* The practice of blaming machinery for bad design conveniently diverted criticism away from capitalism and focused attention on the technical problems of production rather than on the much more difficult and contentious social ones. It was, after all, much easier to see how machines might be redirected to make better design than to conceive how the social relations of capital and labour might be reconstituted to the same end. But what is so remarkable about the myth of the machine as the agent of bad design is its survival into the present despite far greater understanding of the nature of society. Whatever the reasons for its unnaturally long life, the myth has had the effect of obscuring the central place that design holds in production. To treat design in terms only of technical or artistic factors invariably makes it seem trivial and insignificant, detracting from its unique characteristic of embodying, in the most vivid and concrete way, not some but all of the conditions surrounding the production of commodities. In a nineteenth-century calico design, we are looking not only at the product of a steam-powered roller press, nor only at the results of the artistic skill of an individual pattern designer, but also at the product of a system in which it was possible for one man to profit by purchasing the labour of many others at a price which paid for little more than their subsistence.