## 4. Differentiation in Design \*For example, V. Papanek, Design for the Real World, London, 1972, chapter 4. Pocket knives for ladies and pocket knives for men. Some of the range of folding pocket knives sold by the American mail order firm Montgomery Ward. The ladies' knives are universally distinguished from the men's by their smaller size and slimmer handles, usually of white bone (instead of horn as was common for the men's). From Montgomery Ward & Co. catalogue, no.57, 1895, pp. 440-441. pp. 440-441 In its 1895 catalogue, the American mail order company Montgomery Ward & Co. offered 131 sorts of pocket knife. The knives were grouped into four categories, 'ladies'', 'men's', 'boys'', and 'men's heavy pocket and hunting'. Although there were differences between the categories, the variations within each category were relatively slight. The catalogues of other nineteenth-century mail order companies, department stores and manufacturers reveal that it was normal for such dazzling ranges of choice to be offered in everything from pens to sewing machines or dining-room chairs. The profusion has continued, though to a much lesser extent, to this day and has often angered design moralists, who have seen it as an abuse of design and a waste of effort, since it does nothing to improve human existence.\* However, while a dozen designs of pocket knife might have served the needs of Montgomery Ward's customers just as well as the 131 offered, the company could hardly be blamed for over-production of designs, when such wide choices were universal. The diversification of designs, not just to suit many different categories of use and user, but also in the great variety available within each category, was so much a feature of nineteenth-century industry that it cannot be written off as the result of mere wilfulness and irresponsibility. Although the handicraft methods that were still used in most nineteenth-century industries lent themselves to the production of many different designs, standardisation would have been as Ladies' Knives. txt to for Ladies knives. 3 cents, 46000 One binde Each... white hated's good steel blades. 80 10 Per dozen \$1.10 46002 Ladies Pearl Handle Kuife, one blade and giwe futtoner best quality Toney finished 2', In. long. Each \$0 34 Per dozen......\$3.60 46003 Lalies" Finde, Lach Kfe, inland shell handle, two in, well finished and a good articie \$0 1 Per dozen ...81.25 Dail blade, good, strong, large blade. no better knife made for durability and cutting quality Every one warranted. Retail price \$2.00. Our price, each. \$1.50 Per dozen. \$15.00 46054 Three blades, stag horn handle otherwise Mame as No. 46051 Every one warranted Each \$1.00 Per dozen... \$11 00 46056 Three blades, 31% in ebony handle, other WINE Nalile AN TOWNE every one warranted; just the right size for a pocket knife for general Each \$0.70 Per dosen UM .88.40 46004 Two blades with white handle Esch....80.12 Per dozen.... 1.25 46003 Pear Hand Fach \$0 14 Per doren.....\$1.65 46054 Four les "Cig TESS style 3, in h stagram whic ferman spver boysters Fras I do? Waltarit t \$0.00 DIENTE Ang 46029 T #   
45006 Two Deb I handle Each 1'er dozen \$0.1. 1.70 lin Waf so 4 Pole 4507 1 at la 8015 Laitte Wate fa Per dogn Jari handle \$1.00 62