Masculine and Feminine \*See L. Tickner, 'Women and Trousers' in Leisure in the Twentieth Century, Papers at the Second Conference on Twentieth Century Design History, London, 1977, pp. 56-68. J.C. Flugel, The Psychology of Clothes, London, 1930, pp.200- 202. See also Y. Deslandres, Le costume, l'image de l'homme, Paris, 1976, pp. 241-249. easy, and there was nothing in the system of production that compelled manufacturers to pursue variety. They evidently did so because they and their customers wanted the choice, and there was system in the diversity, for the designs fell into distinct categories which generally corresponded to their notions about the shape of society and the distinctions within it. The differences between the designs of manufactured goods thus became the incarnation of contemporary ideas of social difference. Unlike the muddled and contradictory form that these ideas usually took in the minds of ordinary men and women, design represented them in a form that was at once clear, tangible and irrefutable. Montgomery Ward's designs of pocket knife were divided into four classes according to their function and the sex and age of the user. Each category had certain shared features. Ladies' knives were thus distinguishable from men's, while boys knives were superficially similar to men's but almost invariably had only a single hinge for the blades, making them simpler and cheaper. Such distinctions, which could be identified in many other products, rested on the assumption that people in each category of age, sex, class or rank, saw themselves as different from those in other categories and wanted this to be reflected in the goods they bought and used. Although the differentiation of designs expressed the divisions that the manufacturers saw in society, their view must have corresponded closely enough to what others saw for them to have been able to sell their goods. Taken as a whole, therefore, the entire range of manufactured goods constituted a representation of society. The study of design not only confirms the existence of certain social distinctions, but also shows what the differences between the categories were thought to be. In the nineteenth century, great importance came to be attached to the distinctions between men and women, and between adults and children. The division between classes, although historically of overwhelming importance, can be seen less clearly in design, mainly because the poverty of the working class prevented them from buying much, and the middle classes were able to express their status sufficiently well merely by their power to buy goods unavailable to the working class. It was only when classes met in the relationship of master and servant and servants wore clothes and used articles bought by their masters that a differentiation of social class in design became easy to perceive. Throughout history, men and women have dressed differently, and even when, for example, women started wearing trousers or when 'unisex' fashions appeared in the 1960s, the convention, though temporarily interfered with, was never in serious danger of being abandoned.\* Of the possible ways of classifying dress, such as by the class, age or race of the wearer, sex is the primary one, and the most common in histories of costume, for even though the design of clothes worn by men and women has changed, the dress of men at any one time and in any one place has almost always been instantly recognisable from that of women. J.C. Flügel in The Psychology of Clothes suggested that the reason why the sexes dress distinctively is to provide a warning against homosexual attraction in social encounters.\* No such explanation, however, can be applied to sexual differentiation of articles purely for personal 63