dlv ined r to nity It to ont ives. ce in .the the dles mail dis the adies 1   
No Si 18-carat Gond Se Kress R gold and male race and Case 15 arst with wety of hard 13 wat God Ses Key tesser Wa Fly 116 W one Peacelet A quacity 213 10 418 14 Ladies' watches and man's watch, Army and Navy Stores catalogue, 1908. As well as being larger and having a leather instead of metal strap, the man's watch has Roman numerals on the face, unlike most of the ladies' watches, which have Arabic numerals. \*Mrs Ellis, The Daughters of England, London, 1845, p.3. 12 10 and gentlemen's, with differences in the contents of each, and the cases themselves were consistently different in design, the gentlemen's covered in pigskin and the ladies' in morocco leather. This was a distinction consistent with other leather goods, where pigskin, rawhide and alligator were the customary finishes for men's luggage, and the more delicate morocco or crocodile usual for women's. Inside the dressing cases, articles common to the use of both sexes also differed. In the several pages of hairbrushes advertised in the Army and Navy Stores catalogue, gentlemen's hairbrushes were characteristically ovals, with little or no ornament; ladies' hairbrushes, even at an equivalent price, had handles and were generally carved or engraved. In wristwatches, the disparity in size between those for gentlemen and for ladies exceeded that between male and female wrists, and a lady's watch usually had more delicate features and face. Being smaller, ladies' watches have generally been more expensive, but when they can be compared to men's watches of a similar price, the ladies' models are still more ornamented. In the 1907 Army and Navy Stores catalogue, the men's watches were all calibrated with Roman numerals, while the ladies' watches all had Arabic numerals, whose form - curvilinear rather than angular - may be judged more delicate. Articles where design is determined by the sex of the user can be found from all periods of history. The appearance of, say, sixteenth-century purses or modern electric razors will indicate whether they are for men or for women. But sexual differentiation in design has never been more widely applied than it was in the late nineteenth century. The notion of great difference between the sexes was associated with the fact that nineteenth-century men and women of the middle and upper classes found themselves leading very separate existences. The gradual exclusion of middle and upper-class women from active political and commercial life from the sixteenth century onwards had reached the point by the mid-nineteenth century when the public life of women was restricted to the 'social' functions of entertaining and paying calls. This state of affairs was justified by the assumption that women were unsuited to any other kind of existence because of their supposedly fragile and delicate constitutions and their sensitive and emotional temperaments. Some of the feminine characteristics attributed to women were described by a popular author, Mrs Ellis, in her book The Daughters of England, published in 1845: 'As women, then, the first thing of importance is to be content to be inferior to men - inferior in mental power, in the same proportion that you are inferior in bodily strength. Facility of movement, aptitude, and grace, the bodily frame of woman may possess in a higher degree than that of man; just as in the softer touches of mental and spiritual beauty, her character may present a lovelier page than his.'\* The qualities of men, by contrast, were thought to lie in their strength, their vigour, their love of adventure and their ability to suppress emotion. These supposed differences, which betray a confusion of actual physical differences with attributed psychological ones, were to be found in nineteenth-century novels and scientific works alike. Even such a careful observer of the human race as Francis Galton wrote, without qualification, in his Inquiry