\*Francis Galton, Inquiry into Human Faculty and its Development, London, 1883, \*C.W. Marsh, Recollections 1837-1910, Chicago, 1910, p.298, quoted in C.K. Dewhurst, B. MacDowell, M. MacDowell, Artists in Aprons, New York, 1979, p.39. Philips man's electric razor, c.1980, and Philips 'Ladyshave woman's electric razor, 1980. The lady's razor is coloured, and decorated with a floral device, so appearing more 'feminine' than the plain black model for men. into Human Faculty and Its Development (1883): 'One notable peculiarity in the character of the woman is that she is capricious and coy, and has less straightforwardness than the man,' a statement which echoes exactly the differences between the men and women in Elizabeth Gaskell's novel Wives and Daughters, written nineteen years earlier.\* There, the feminine qualities represented in Molly Gibson are moral virtue, sensitivity and susceptibiity to illness; in her stepsister, Cynthia Kirkpatrick, they are beauty and inconstancy. The leading men in the novel, Dr Gibson and Roger Hamley, are distinguished by their directness, by their dedication to a greater purpose (one to medicine, the other to science), by their energy and vigour, and by their capacity to surmount emotion. Roger Hamley's brother, Osborne, however, lacked all of these qualities and accordingly did not survive to the end of the book. Few statements can express the great distance that lay between the Victorian masculine and feminine ideals more succinctly than the following, from the recollections of a septuagenarian American, writing in 1910: 'Nature made woman weaker, physically and mentally, than man, and also better and more refined. Man, compared with her is coarse and strong and aggressive.'\* Because there is little evidence for such firm opinions as this having been expressed before the nineteenth century, it seems that masculinity and femininity took on these distinctive characteristics in the course of the century. The characteristics did not exist as realities, but as ideas; to live comfortably with them, people needed evidence of their truth. Fiction, education and religion all contributed and so, too, did design. The differences between the Army and Navy Stores toilet cases corresponded exactly to the differences that were said to exist between men and women: tough and rugged as against delicate and refined. However, unlike the other bearers of this ideology, which relied heavily upon words, design was more potent, for it provided enduring, visible and tangible signs of the differences between men and women as they were held to exist. ## tandard