ERA2552 Childhood Arthur Devis: The James Family, oil painting, 1751. An eighteenth-century perception of childhood: the children are dressed and depicted like the adults. Just as design could embody distinctions between masculine and feminine, so it could also express assumptions about the nature of childhood. The crockery and furniture intended for middle-class children that manufacturers first began to produce in quantity at the very end of the nineteenth century were characteristically painted in pastel shades or decorated with pictures of animals or scenes from nursery rhymes. These items would rarely, if ever, have been bought by children themselves, and their appearance must have had less to do with children's own desires than with adults' wishes to perceive children's needs as unlike their own. How childhood came to be seen as a condition, not simply of weakness, but also of innocence, naivety and virtue has been discussed by the French historian Philippe Ariès in his book Centuries of Childhood. Even if Ariès is correct in placing the major changes in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, it is clear that the ideas did not stop evolving then. The growing belief in the absolute goodness of childhood culminated in the appallingly sentimental descriptions of childhood innocence that are to be found in turnof-the-century literature; only with the discoveries of psychoanalysis did ideas about the nature of childhood start to change. Signs of the changes in perception can be seen in the way children have been depicted. In a mid-eighteenth century portrait, The James Family by Arthur Devis, the daughters are given equal prominence with the adults in the composition and are dressed as miniature adults. C.R. Leslie's portrait of the Grosvenor family painted in 1831, makes the children the centre of the family's attention, but distinguishes the younger ones by their dress: the small boy near the left of the picture wears not adult clothes but a frock, a distinctive mark of childhood. These paintings present