\*C. Gilbert, The Life and Work of Thomas Chippendale, London, 1978, pp.53-54. \*J.H. Plumb, 'The New World of Children in Eighteenth Century England', Past and Present no. 67, May 1975, p.90. C.R. Leslie: The Grosvenor Family, oil painting, 1831. An illustration of the change in attitude to chidhood over a century: children are sharply distinguished from adults, by performing essentially childish activities in front of the family and being dressed in some cases, like the boy in the centre, in children's clothes. a reflection of the general tendency of the nineteenth century to be on the whole more inclined than earlier centuries both to treat childhood as a privileged state and to stress its differences from adulthood. These changes, which can be documented in the child-rearing manuals of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, were visible particularly in dress. There is also evidence that toys, games and books for children began to be produced commercially in the late eighteenth century, but there are few signs of specially-designed furniture or crockery, apart from cribs and cradles.\* The pattern books of eighteenth and early nineteenth century cabinetmakers and upholsterers do not contain nursery furniture, which they were only rarely called upon to supply.\* However, nursery furniture had been recognised as a special category by the time that J.C. Loudon's Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture was first published in 1833. Among its very thorough descriptions of furniture designs and uses, there was a short section on nursery furniture. Most of the items were miniature versions of standard cane and Windsor chairs, the same as appeared from the middle of the century in the catalogues of large furniture manufacturers. A few, however, were not simply smaller versions of adult furniture, but were specifically for children. One of these, illustrated by Loudon, was the Astley Cooper chair, named after the surgeon who had designed it to make children sit up straight at table. Only at the very end of the century were there entire ranges of nursery furniture that were different from those for adults, not only in scale but also in form and appearance. Some of these new articles, such as the purpose-designed toy cupboards, specifically filled children's needs, some offered the advantage of being hygienic and easy to clean, while others were decorated with pictures of