Nursery furniture. Purposedesigned chairs of various types for the nursery. The Astley Cooper chair (bottom left) was intended to make children sit up straight at table. From J.C. Loudon, Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture, 1857, p.1086. Nursery cups, mugs and beaker, decorated with animals. From Army and Navy Stores catalogue, 1908. atter the bassinet; that is, when the emia is about a year un din mas ven Yeaner. may here mention a description of crib, which has hooks or other fastenings; by which. when one side of it is taken out, the crib can be made fast to the side of the mother's bed so that she may have access to the child during the night, by merely stretching out he arms, and taking it to her. 2145. Chairs are the next articles made use of by children; and those about London are of four kinds. Fig. 1999 is a child's chair of the first kind. having a night pan, and a matted seat. A small stuffed flannel of the size of the seat, and having a round hole in the centre, is generally placed over it when it is to be used, in order to prevent the pan from hurting the child. (In some districts of 1999 Italy, and other parts of the Continent, rings of stuffed cloth, or stuffed lea ther, or of rush matting, are used for the same purpose by grown-up persons.) In England, infants of ordinary health and strength are put into chairs of this kind, when be tween three and four months old. Fig. 1998 is a child's high chair, 1998 to be used when it first begins to sit at table. There is a bar or stick put across between the arms, to keep 2000 the child from falling out, and sometimes there is a foot-board. A child in average health 2001 is put into such a chair when about twelve or fourteen months old. Fig. 2000 is an Astley Cooper's chair; being a form recommended by that eminent surgeon, with the view of pre venting children from acquiring a habit of lean ing forward, or stooping; the upright position of the back affording sup port when the child is placed at table, and eat ing, which a sloping backed chair does not. It is proper to observe that some medical men do not approve of these chairs. Fig. 2001 is a child's elbow-chair, or bergère, as it is commonly called in England. This chair stands on a stool, to which it is attached by a thumb-screw; and, when the NURSERY CHINA. Inglish China Coloured Toys Decoration, Gilt Edges Sug 0/6 Tea Cup and Saucer........ 0/8 Milk Tumbler 0/8 Small Cup and Saucer... 0/8 Small Mug 075 Tea Plate to match, 0/6 ach 69