S \*Child Life, new series, vol. III, no. 11, 15th July 1901, pp. 181-182. \*See C. Watkins, W. Harvey, R. Senft, Shelley Potteries, London, 1980, pp. 79-85. Nursery china, Heal's, c. 1925. Like most nursery ware, the decoration depicted animals, in this case ducks, hens and geese, from the farmyard. to distinguish children's utensils. Where birds and mammals had appeared on china for adults, the association had tended to be with hunting, but the motifs on children's china were different, for the animals were anthropomorphised and the children were evidently meant to empathise with them. It is possible that the choice of these symbols to indicate childishness was associated with the stress that was placed in the late nineteenth century on play as an essential activity for children. That this was a middle class concern is illustrated by the observations about workingclass childhood made by visitors to the new Board schools set up in Britain under the Education Act of 1870. These visitors reported being 'pained by the utter unchildlikeness of the street children, and in one area of London, Bermondsey, a Children's Guild of Play was organised 'to make them little children again, and fill their minds with real child's play'.\* Games where children imitated animals were thought particularly appropriate, and it may be because animals (especially rabbits) provided such good models for playful and hence childish behaviour that they appeared so often in children's stories and on articles for children's use, like the nursery wares that the Shelley Pottery began to produce in Britain in 1902.\* A few nursery articles, like the Astley Cooper chair, were designed to influence the physical development of children, but most of the special furniture and utensils had no bearing at all upon children's health or physique. For middle-class families to spend unprecedented sums on specially designed and decorated nursery articles that served no hygienic or physical purpose can only be explained by changes in ideas about the needs of childhood. The introduction to the Heal's 1914 catalogue of nursery furniture, hinted at just this: