Teapot as Mushroom House from a nursery teaset, Shelley Potteries, 1926, designed by Mabel Lucie Attwell. Nursery china taken to its most whimsical extremes. \*Heal & Co., The Nursery Book, n.d. [1914], p.3. Social Class 'Formerly the children, even in the families of the well-to-do, were relegated to an attic or some room not thought sufficiently good for any other purpose, furnished with things discarded from other rooms. Nothing was placed there because it was specially suitable, but rather that it had become unsuitable or too dilapidated elsewhere. 'Now the nursery is carefully chosen, well lighted and well planned. The aspect, size, ventilation and general cheerfulness considered, in short everything is done to make the nursery a pleasant and convenient place, suitable to the needs of the occupants, and in every way a fit training ground, both physical and moral, for the young. 'Children are admittedly very susceptible to their environment, therefore, how important it is to surround them with things at once beautiful and useful. Place a child in the midst of bright and cheerful things and you go a long way towards making him happy and good-tempered; it is difficult to cultivate these virtues in a gloomy setting.'\* If, as Heal's argued, the newly discovered needs of childhood demanded a special environment, the practical effect of applying this principle to design was to endow what were otherwise no more than speculations about child psychology with the character of objective truth, and to remove childhood further from adulthood than it had ever been before. Important though the development of social class has been historically, class distinctions in design are far from easy to trace. This has been partly because, at least until recently, distinctions between classes have been marked so clearly by different patterns of consumption that distinctions in design would have been irrelevant. However, the one commodity universal to all classes is dress, which therefore offers a promising subject in which to discuss class differentiation. Costume has long been regarded as an important social indicator, but never more than it was by the Victorians. Mrs Merrifield, in her book Dress as a Fine Art (1854), listed its 72