\*Mrs Merrifield, Dress as a Fine Art, London, 1854, p.5. \*Quoted by, and translated from, H. Vanier, La Mode et Ses Métiers, Paris, 1960, pp. 155-156. \*Catalogues of E. Moses & Son, Aldgate, London, 1846-55. \*J. Woodforde, The Diary of a Country Parson, edited by J. Beresford, vol. V, London, 1931, p. 304. \*A. Buck, 'The Dress of Domestic Servants in the Eighteenth Century', in Strata of Society, Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Conference of the Costume Society, London, 1974, pp. 10-16. \*Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee on the Duties on Printed Cotton Goods, Parliamentary Papers, 1818, vol. III, pp. 305, 316 and 341. function of marking the wearer's station in society third after the needs of decency and warmth.\* Part of the reason for the nineteenth-century preoccupation with this function was the fact that the customary social distinctions in dress were increasingly being ignored or flouted. The development of cheap ready-to-wear tailoring made it possible for men of all ranks to wear virtually identical clothing. As the French Journal des Tailleurs commented on the dress of visitors to the Paris Exhibition of 1855: 'Between the black coat of M. Rothschild and the black coat of his lowest clerk, there are only imperceptible nuances which could be appreciated only by a tailor's apprentice - M. Rothschild's coat probably comes from the Renard workrooms and cost him 180 francs. The clerk's coat without doubt was bought at La Belle Jardinière and cost about 35 francs. For the present, that is the only difference, only M. Rothschild's coat will stay black, and the clerk's will turn from blue to dirty grey. M. Rothschild is also a little more free in his movements.'\* Because costume expressed conflicting desires to obscure social distinctions and to make them apparent, it is by no means a straightforward example of the expression of class structures in design and is complicated by the fact that the working classes frequently wore second-hand clothes. The only kind of clothing specific to the working class were the slop-made jackets and trousers sold by the clothing warehouses as working clothes.\* These cheap, loosefitting clothes were cut from jean, fustian or moleskin; in practice, those who wore them would have been identified as working class, but they were neither designed nor chosen with this intention in mind. A more rewarding subject for comparison is textiles, as printed cottons were among the first industrially made products to be sold to all classes. In the eighteenth century, printed cottons had been relatively expensive and fashionable wear for middle and upperclass women. Although printed cottons might have been bought by the middle classes for their servants to wear, as they were by Parson Woodforde, who recorded in 1801 buying '2 Cotton Gowns for my two maids, of Pink and White, 17 Yards at 2/6d, Â£2.2.6d'\*, they would not have been bought by working-class women themselves. The cotton print dresses worn by working-class women would generally have been secondhand or cast-offs. It was more usual, though, for working-class people to wear woollen rather than cotton clothing.\* With the great expansion of the Lancashire cotton industry early in the nineteenth century, the market changed. For the first time, working-class women could buy new cotton dress material for themselves, and they did so on such a scale that by 1818 they were said to constitute almost the entire home market for the printed cotton trade. A London draper reported in 1818 that printed fabrics . . . are worn principally by servants and the lower class of people.'\* Sales of printed cottons to middle-class customers had declined in the 1800s and 1810s because of the fashion for wearing plain white dresses which was inspired, it was said, by the wish to imitate the form of classical figures. Although printed cottons came back into fashion in the 1820s, the working classes still dominated the home market.