\*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, Minutes of Evidence, Parliamentary Papers, 1840, vol. VI, para.3749. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 1697-1704. \*Select Committee on Printed Cotton Goods, 1818, p.320. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 1708, 5035-37. Henry and Augustus Mayhew, The Greatest Plague in Life, London, 1847, p.86. Interior of a cotton mill, c. 1830. The women are dressed in gingham and printed striped cotton, characteristic workingclass wear of the date. From E. Baines, History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain, London, 1835. As the manufacturers themselves recognised, the market was now divided between working-class custom for prints mainly on calico, and fashionable buyers of prints on superior cottons.\* In theory, the same designs could have been printed on any quality of fabric, but, in practice, the printers used different designs for the two markets. Certain patterns known to be popular with the working class were produced largely for that market.\* According to evidence given to a Select Committee in 1818, the wearing of ginghams, both woven and printed, was normally restricted to the working class.\* An engraving of the interior of a cotton mill in the 1830s shows a millhand dressed in gingham and another in striped cotton, suggesting that these patterns were characteristic workingclass wear. According to evidence given in 1840, a large class of simple prints, particularly Bengal stripes and green or navy blue with white spots, were steadily in demand with the working class.\* That such patterns typified working class wear in the 1840s is confirmed by the description of a maid in Henry and Augustus Mayhew's satirical novel The Greatest Plague in Life, published in 1847: 'When the conceited bit of goods came after the station, she looked so clean, tidy and respectable, and had on such a nice plain cotton gown, of only one colour - being a nice white spot on a dark green ground... that I felt quite charmed at seeing her dressed so thoroughly like what a respectable servant ought to be.'\* Apart from the familiar stripe and spot patterns, it is not possible to identify from the surviving pattern books which designs were aimed at a working-class market. Certain firms did specialise in cheap prints, but their pattern books are not on the whole the ones to have survived, and it is only occasionally possible to identify designs known to have been sold to the working class. For the middle-class market, the cotton printers produced patterns, mostly on more expensive types of fabric, that were calculated to attract well-to-do customers by the refinement and