## Above: Printed cotton dress, English, c.1784. In the eighteenth century, printed cottons, like this dress, were restricted to middle and upper-class wear. Right: White cotton dress, English, c.1810. The growth of a working-class market for printed cottons caused them to be abandoned by the middle and upper classes, who started to buy only fine white cottons. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, paras 948-950. succession of new designs was produced in small quantities for middle-class women who wished to be dressed in patterns that they could be sure had not yet been reproduced on the cheaper fabrics worn by working-class women. It is hard to pin down exactly how the patterns for the middle class differed from those for the working class and whether they indicated anything about the differences that were supposed to exist between the two classes. In any case, many fashionable designs were subsequently reproduced by the manufacturers on cheap cotton, a practice which both attracted working-class customers wanting to follow the fashion, and caused the owners of dresses in the first, expensive printing of a pattern to discard them, because they had become 'common', and to buy new ones. What evidence there is about the patterns intended exclusively for the working class suggests that these were thought to be distinguished by their vulgarity and crudity. However, this does not seem to have been a permanent characteristic, for, as one critic wrote in 1856: good authorities in the Midland Counties, at least, say that the great mass of the people who usually buy these things prefer 75