Cotton print designs, English, 1850. These designs are rare instances of patterns which are known to have been produced specifically for the workingclass market. From Journal of Design, vol. IV, no.31, September 1851, pp.9-10. \*G. Wallis, 'Recent Progress in Design as Applied to Manufactures', Journal of the Society of Arts, no. 173, vol. IV, 14th March 1856, p.292. \*'Counsel to Designers for Woven Fabrics', Journal of Design, vol. II, no. 18, August 1850, p.179. the smaller, neater and more simply coloured designs, to the blotchy abominations which used formerly to be sought after, and which in too many instances, are still presumed by the less observant manufacturer and retailer, to constitute the taste of the working class.'\* Nor was the attempt to distinguish between the refinement of designs for the middle class and the coarseness of deigns for the working class always successful. How a pattern was judged could depend to a large extent on who was wearing it; as another critic observed, '... it sometimes occurs that a staring pattern, which we should be disposed to call extremely vulgar on a commonplace person, is worn with impunity by one of ultra fashionable rank. A distinguished air, and a fine person, may carry off the extravagance of a design . . .'\* Thus, while the evidence leaves no doubt there was differentiation in cotton print patterns on the basis of class, identifying the class for which particular designs were intended is made difficult, if not impossible, by the nature of the market for cottons, where the manufacturers, their customers and the passage of time all conspired to obscure the distinctions as they might have existed at any one moment. \*On the history of soap, see Charles Wilson, The History of Unilever, London, 1954, vol. I, part I; and H.R. Edwards, Competition and Monopoly in the British Soap Industry, Oxford, 1962. The history of another commodity, soap, shows design being used commercially to create demand in a particular class market. Unlike printed cottons, where class differentiation in design had long been accepted, soap products were not manufactured for specific classes of consumer until W.H. Lever began to market his new soap, Sunlight, by giving it a brand image with specific working class appeal. Soap for laundering clothes and for household cleaning was manufactured in Britain on a scale that grew steadily throughout the nineteenth century.\* By 1885, there were a number of well-established firms in the business, but none of them had yet produced soap in a form that could be said to have been designed. There were about half a dozen basic varieties of household soap made by these firms according to accepted recipes.\* The soap was supplied in long bars to the grocers who cut pieces 76