\*R.L. Wilson, Soap Through the Ages, Port Sunlight, 1952, p.13. \*Quoted in C. Wilson, p.41. \*Quoted in C. Wilson, p.67. Bar of soap and tablet of Sunlight soap. Bars, cut off by weight for the customer, were the normal form in which soap was sold until W.H. Lever started producing one pound tablets stamped with his brand name. off and sold them by weight to the customers, much as if it were cheese. Until the 1880s, each soap manufacturer operated in a regional market in which he had a monopoly. There was thus little or no competition between the makers. Any stamp or brand on the soap was of no interest to the customer, who chose a kind of soap, such as 'mottled', 'curd', 'primrose', or 'Windsor', and not a make. As one of the main soap manufacturers explained at the time: ... there is little or no difference in quality between different makes of Bar Soaps there is a Thomas's Primrose, a Knight's Primrose, a Cook's Primrose - all the same soap. It is impossible therefore by the nature of the case to... [attempt] through advertising to create a demand in favour of any one particular make.'\* This state of affairs changed rapidly with the arrival of W.H. Lever in the soap industry in 1885. Lever had been a partner in a wholesale grocery business with branches in Bolton and Wigan, a business that depended for its prosperity on the rising standard of living of working-class customers. In 1884, he began to tire of grocery and turned his attention to soap, on which working-class households were tending to spend more and more money. Lever aimed to capture this market, which existing manufacturers of household soaps had not yet tried to reach, with a special product. He was to become so successful in selling his own new 'washer' soap that other soap manufacturers went out of their way to claim that their bar soaps were not for working-class customers. One established manufacturer was to explain: 'Bar soaps do not come into competition with "washers". That is a special soap sold in the lower-class neighbourhoods, and we find that it does not sell in the best-class neighbourhoods. They still stick to the bar soap trade in some form or another.'\* In his grocery business, Lever had sold bar soap made by other manufacturers but branded with his own name. In 1884, he realised that to increase his sales to working class customers, he had to advertise. For this, he needed a distinctive product with a distinctive name. In 1884 or 1885, he introduced the name 'Sunlight SOAP H&S H&S 0   
H&S H&S LILAND 1263 ENGLAND 7331 ENGLAND ENGLAND SUMAGRA H&S ENGLAND H&S EI ENGLAND 77