Printed paper wrapping for Lifebuoy soap. As well as selling soap in tablets, Lever wrapped it in paper wrappers printed with the brand name and publicity for the product. This ensured that his brand was distinguished from all others. \*Quoted in C. Wilson, pp. 38-39. LIFEBUY ROYAL DISINFECTA SOA FOR PRESERVADN OF HEALTH AND PREVENTIO OF SICKNESS LISWPRIN, tort ROYAL DISINI for all the bar soaps he sold; among them was a soap made with a high proportion of palm oil instead of tallow, so that it had an easy-lathering quality, which allowed Lever to publicise it as 'the soap which washes itself', or 'self-washer' soap. He anticipated a future for it as a household soap for the working-class market. To distinguish it from existing types of bar soap and to draw attention to the brand, he sold it in one pound tablets, ready-wrapped in imitation parchment with his name and 'Sunlight' printed on. Although there were precedents in America, forming household soap into tablets was a new development in Britain and one which made Lever's product instantly distinguishable by both appearance and brand name from all other soaps in grocers' shops. Because of difficulties with the makers of the 'washer' soap, Lever leased a soap works in Warrington in 1885 and began making it himself. From then on, it was the only sort of soap to be called Sunlight, a name which identified it both as a type and as a make. Lever's business quickly became a phenomenal success: annual production increased from 3,000 tons in 1886 to 18,000 tons in 1890, the year after the move to his new factory at Port Sunlight, and to around 52,000 tons in 1900. Much of Lever's success rested on having identified a distinct working-class market and having designed and packaged a product which he then could advertise effectively, an option not open to other manufacturers because of the lack of differentiation between their products. Lever took great pains with his advertising, using clever slogans, displaying advertisements on railway stations and roadside hoardings, and taking space in newspapers. Throughout, the advertising was directed specifically at working-class custom, as Lever himself later made clear: 'In the very first handbook we issued with Sunlight Soap, which was got up by myself, entitled Sunlight Soap and How to Use It, everything was brought down to the level of the working man's needs. The only point where I went beyond this was with instructions for cleaning pampas grass, feathers and so on, but I view these as to be found in many working men's houses, the pampas grass in a jar on the Bible in the sitting room and the feathers in the hats of the daughters.'\* Lever's other advertising strategies, of which the most famous was the slogan, 'Why does a woman look older sooner than a man?' were also aimed at working-class customers. Such aggressive advertising techniques, which were deplored by other manufacturers, succeeded in making Sunlight popular with the M BRA 447 78