## THIR Railway uniforms, North Eastern Railway, 1905. The railways were very hierarchical organisations. The occupations and ranks of employees were expressed in the cut and cloth of the uniforms. From North Eastern Railway, Specifications of Uniforms, Leeds, 1905, facing pp.63, 68, 101, 108. \*See L. Davidoff, 'Mastered for Life; Servant and Wife in Victorian and Edwardian England', Journal of Social History, vol.7, no.4, 1974, pp.406-428. \*For instance H. & A. Mayhew, pp.89-90, 94. \*P. Cunnington, Costume of Household Servants, London, 1974, chapters 4 and 5. be referred to as a 'problem', which suggests that the relationship was undergoing some kind of change. Hindsight suggests that the problem lay not in domestic service itself, but resulted from changes elsewhere that were making it into an archaic form of employment.\* Jobs where the employee lived in the master's house, ate his food, and was regarded as his responsibility had once been normal, but in most occupations this form of employment died out during the eighteenth century. Such customs survived in the nineteenth century only for farmworkers in some districts, and for domestic servants. On the whole, working-class men and women looked for jobs where they did not have to live in and were paid solely in money. The survival of domestic service's anachronistic form at a time when other occupations gave more freedom and independence provoked considerable discontent among servants, who saw their friends and relatives leading a more independent, though less secure, life and envied them for it. This discontent led in the later nineteenth century to the increasingly common complaints from employers about 'headstrong' and disobedient servants. Any aspirations towards independence in servants were combated by the increasing concern of masters and mistresses to make sure their servants were identified as different from themselves. Symptomatic of this was the anxiety of mistresses at being mistaken for their maids or at their maids being mistaken for themselves, both popular subjects for cartoons and humorous stories in the middle of the century.\* Although male servants had normally worn livery since the eighteenth century, female servants, who greatly outnumbered them, did not wear distinguishing costumes until the 1860s.\* Parson Woodforde's maids wore dresses made from printed cottons he bought for them, and eighteenth-century paintings show maids 80