because he is the chief of the floorists. GEOGRAPHY FOR GIRLS situated in Belgravia Iceland is CRINOLINE FOR DOMESTIC USE. Dometic. "BOTHER MISSUS! SHE WEARS IT HERSELF, AND I DON'T SEE WHY I SHOULDN'T." QUESTION FOR SOLICITORS-What nasty thing has more limbs than a centipede! The Law CRINOLINE FOR DOMESTIC USE. Minus. "MARY! GO AND TAKE OFF THAT THING, DIRECTLY PRAY, ARE YOU AWARE WHAT A RIDICULOUS OBJECT YOU ARE!' Cartoon of a mistress and maid in crinolines, 1853. Servants imitating the costume of their mistress was a recurrent theme of cartoons and humorous stories in the 1850s, and indicates the anxiety that existed over this before servants' uniforms became normal. From Punch, vol.24, 1853, p.170. \*Margaret Powell, Below Stairs, London, 1968, p.63. \*M. Girouard, The Victorian Country House, Oxford, 1971, pp 20-22 servants to dress themselves in garments that could be mistaken for the smart dresses in their mistresses' wardrobes. Faced with this prospect and with servants who were seeking greater independence, mistresses began to insist upon uniforms for their maids, particularly parlour maids, who would be seen by visitors. From the 1860s, it became normal for maids to wear black dresses, with white caps and white aprons, the distinctive garb of the domestic servant well into the twentieth century. The inferior status of servants was emphasised by other strategies. Rules for servants' behaviour became increasingly elaborate and ritualised: for example, servants were expected never to hand an article directly to their employers or their guests except on a silver tray. Restrictions on when servants might go out of the house and who might visit them reinforced the sense that they were their employers' property. As if the rules in themselves were not sufficient, the distinction between master and servant was made physically apparent, when large houses began to be designed in the mid-nineteenth century with entirely separate servants' quarters and independent circulation systems so that servants could carry out their work largely out of sight of their employers. Typical of the arrangements for segregating servants from their masters were those at Walton House in Surrey, remodelled by Sir Charles Barry in 1837. The servants occupied the top half of the building above the axis of the carriage porch and entrance hall, and their quarters connected with the master's end of the house only through a small door in the entrance gallery and through the passageway at the extreme left of the plan. Though Walton was a large house, much the same principle of strongly defined spatial segregation of masters and servants was to be found in smaller houses designed for the middle and upper classes in the nineteenth century.\* 82