SERVANTS PRESS BED-STEADS Folding bedsteads for servants, Heal's catalogue, 1896. \*L. Swainbank in Useful Toil, edited by J. Burnett, London, 1974, p.222. \*Powell, p.80. Heal & Son Manufacturers bedroom, furnished for £4.14.9d, with a simple iron bedstead and a chest of drawers, chair and washstand in plain deal. Though a servant with a room furnished as well as this might have considered herself lucky, the plainness of the designs left no doubt as to whom they were for. Even in this room, there was no sign of luxury, no accommodation for self-indulgent comfort or relaxation. The general standard of the furnishing of most servants' rooms was far more comfortless. They were often furnished with castoffs and calculated to give the servant no chance to feel that there could be grounds for comparison between herself and her mistress. The lesson that lay in the austerity of the servants' furniture was not lost upon servants themselves. The autobiographies of domestics frequently refer to the discomfort of the furnishings they were provided with. One former housemaid, who entered service in 1922, wrote: 'My second venture was a definite improvement, as under-housemaid of two in a private house... I had a room to myself here. The type of room I discovered through trial that one always expected in 'gentlemen's service' has an iron bedstead with lumpy mattress, specially manufactured for the use of maids, I suspect, a painted chest of drawers, with spotty mirror, lino-covered floor and a strip of matting at the bedside.'\* Another former servant, Margaret Powell, who entered service a year earlier, has described the rationale for the choice of such furnishings: 'It was the opinion of "Them" upstairs that servants couldn't appreciate good living or comfort, and therefore must have plain fare, they must have dungeons to work in and to eat in, and they must retire to cold spartan bedrooms to sleep.'\* The one space in the Victorian house which was used by both master and servant was the hall. Masters and their visitors passed through the hall, when entering and leaving the house, while servants were required to be there to receive guests and take their hats and coats. Because of their combined use by servants and masters, halls needed a special type of furniture, particularly of chair. Although people of the master's class might pass through the hall, they were unlikely to linger or sit down; the only people 84