\*C. Cook, The House Beautiful, Essays on Beds and Tables, Stools and Candlesticks, New York, 1878, p.33. \*Cook, p.33. likely to spend long enough in it to need to sit down were inferiors, whether servants, prospective servants waiting for interview, or, as the American author of one nineteenth-century book on the decoration of the home put it, 'messenger boys, book agents, the census man, and the bereaved lady who offers us soap.'\* Hall chairs would be seen by the master and his guests and thus had to conform to the standards of beauty found elsewhere in the house, but there was no reason for them to be any more comfortable than the rest of the furniture provided for servants. The same American authority on decoration explained: 'As visitors of this class are the only ones who will sit in the hall, considerations of comfort may be allowed to yield to picturesqueness, and any chair or bench that gives us that will serve . . .'\* The conventional hall chair was usually made of oak or mahogany, with an elaborately carved back and turned legs, but was distinguished from drawing-room or dining-room chairs by its plank seat and lack of upholstery; it was consistent with other Servant's bedroom, furnished by Heal's, 1896. The plain furniture signified that it was for a servant. From Heal's catalogue, 1896. Bedroom, furnished by Heal's, 1896. The contrast between this room, for the mistress, and the servant's room reinforced the social distance between the mistress and maid. From Heal's catalogue, 1896. 85