Hall chairs, c. 1850. To be seen by all, but sat upon only by social inferiors, this hall chair characteristically had ornate back and legs, but a plank seat. From William Smee & Sons, Designs of Furniture, a stock of which is always kept ready for sale at their cabinet and upholstery manufactory and workrooms, no.6 Finsbury pavement, London, c. 1850, p.357. ## O à¼¦à¼§,, à1/4|à1/4§,, \*See K.L. Ames, 'Meaning in Artefacts: Hall Furnishings in Victorian America', Journal of Interdisciplinary History, vol. IX, no.1, 1978, pp. 19-46. furniture for servants in its austerity, but its ornament made it quite unlike anything found below stairs. It was a hybrid designed to be seen by one class and used by another.\* The distinctions in furniture were also expressed in tableware. In catalogues like those of the Army and Navy Stores in the 1890s and 1900s, the servants' ware was plain and unornamented, or decorated only with the most ubiquitous design of all, the willow pattern, and it contrasted sharply with the elegant and highly decorated china which was featured on other pages and would be seen standing on the shelves of the kitchen dresser while the servants ate off the plainest of crockery. If such distinctions in design were intended to convince domestic servants of their own lowly status, it also helped employers believe that servants were as inferior as their occupation and accoutrements seemed to make them. Servants often complained that employers were oblivious of the conditions under which they worked and of the tasks they were expected to do: when they dared to point out the unreasonableness or impossibility of what was required of them, mistresses often appeared genuinely surprised and shocked by what was being expected of them. Had servants worn clothes like other people and lived in accomodation more like that of other members of the household and less like that of a penal establishment, the temptation to assume that they were not only poorer but mentally inferior and less civilised than their employers would not have been so strong. At a time when liberal thought was beginning to doubt the 'natural' inferiority of servants, the stigmatising of servants by the clothes they wore and the articles they used was convincing proof of the wrongheadedness of the new ideas for those who were unsympathetic to them. Kitchen china for use by servants, 1908. Either the ubiquitous willow pattern, or plain and distinctly marked, such ware contrasted with the ornate china used by the masters, and reminded servants of their place. From the Army and Navy Stores catalogue, 1908. 86