Variety \*C. Wilson, pp.55-57. While the desire to embody social distinctions may have accounted for, say, the classification of pocket knives into ladies' and men's patterns, it does not explain why ladies should have required a choice of seventeen different designs, nor men a choice of 39 designs. How are we to explain the compulsion which gripped so many manufacturers to be so prolific with designs for their products? One possible answer is that variety gave customers a degree of choice and enabled them to feel more sure of their own individuality. A masculine-looking pocket knife might underline the purchaser's view of himself as manly, but as long as it was the only men's knife available, it would do nothing to make him feel different from other men. What would do this would be the opportunity to choose from a range of knives or to have a particular design which he alone among his acquaintances might possess. Variety for such reasons occurred to the greatest degree in goods which were conspicuous to others, such as furniture and clothes, or in printed cottons, an industry where manufacturers were very conscious of trading on desires for individuality. The belief that unusual or unique possessions bestow individuality upon their owners is an illusion that has been indulged in for a long time. This aspect of commodity fetishism was presumably derived from the aristocratic practice of collecting relics, curiosities and unique works of art, but how manufactured goods, by their nature never unique, ever came to be regarded in the same light is mysterious. Whatever the cause, capitalist manufacture was quick to take advantage of it, and produce ten, twenty or a hundred designs where one would have sufficed. A second reason for the variety of designs was the manufacturers anticipation of increasing their sales. Subtle variations in what was essentially the same product might persuade people to buy a second or third article where one would have been enough for their needs. Cake stands, shaving mugs and nursery ware fulfilled functions that could have been served equally well by standard china products, but they provided customers with a rationale for buying additional articles. Similar reasons explain why W.H. Lever, having established the success of Sunlight soap, began to market what was essentially the same soap in a number of slightly different forms. In 1894, Lever introduced Lifebuoy soap, which was Sunlight soap with the addition of phenol (carbolic acid) to give it hygienic properties, and in 1899, he introduced two more varieties, Monkey Brand which contained a scouring agent, and Sunlight in flake form, subsequently known as Lux. Lever had recognised that there was a physical limit to any household's demand for soap, and that the only way to increase sales was to offer new variants for specialised uses, which consumers could be persuaded to buy in addition to the original brand. The principle of diversifying the product in order to increase sales, which has been followed ever since in soap manufacture, was at work in a great many nineteenth-century industries. A third possible reason for variety was that manufacturers and their designers may initially have been uncertain of the appropriate imagery to represent the qualities attributed to each social group. Manufacturers stood a greater chance of finding, say, a hairbrush that exactly fitted assumptions about masculinity if they started by offering a large number of designs rather than a few or only one. It was the decision as to which designs would represent people's 87