notions of the elusive qualities of social class that proved the most difficult, and it was therefore not surprising that the greatest proliferation and fastest change was to be found in this category of consumer goods. To most manufacturers of consumer goods in the nineteenth century, the commercial advantages of producing a great many different designs far outweighed the disadvantages in cost. However, the relative profitability of producing one or many designs depended somewhat upon the method of production employed. Handicraft industries lent themselves more easily than mechanised industries to the production of many different designs. Where the forming of each component and the final assembly was the work of a craftsman, it made little difference whether he worked to one design or another, but in more highly mechanised industries, the preparation of new dies, templates, jigs and moulds entailed great expense and was a disincentive to variety. The effects of the change from entirely handicraft to more mechanised methods of manufacture upon the range of designs can be seen in the output of the Windsor chair manufacturers of High Wycombe. From early in the nineteenth century, each component of the chair, its seat, legs and balusters, was made by an independent craftsman, who sold his work to a chair master. The masters employed framers to assemble the chairs, and undertook the distribution and sale of the chairs. All the processes of production, from sawing up the logs to the framing, were carried out by hand labour; one of the processes, the turning of the legs and stretchers, was the work of craftsmen known as 'bodgers', who worked in huts in the woods around High Wycombe, turning the legs on primitive treadle lathes from timber that they themselves had felled. The number of designs of Windsor chair available was very great, as the surviving catalogues show. Many of the masters would buy a standard, locally printed catalogue with three to four hundred designs in it and would have their own name overprinted on it, with an indication of which designs they manufactured. The larger firms generally offered well over a hundred designs, and one master, Edwin Skull, who had a specially printed broadsheet, advertised 141. As long as the masters relied on hand labour, there was almost no economic limit to the variety of designs they could offer, for they had only to instruct the craftsmen to produce a different design to obtain it. In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the masters gradually began to introduce machines into their workshops, principally as a means of employing labour that was less skilled and therefore cheaper. Machines were developed that shaped the seats to a preset pattern, work formerly done by a man using a curved adze. Other machines were introduced to bore holes at preset angles in the seat for the legs and uprights, a task previously done with a brace and bit by the framer, whose skill had lain in his ability to judge by eye the different angle needed for each hole. Increasingly, during the twentieth century, the masters began to employ machinery for every process: balusters were cut to jigs, and finally even the low-paid work of the bodgers was replaced by electric lathes in the factories, though several bodgers survived until 1939. With the use of so many machines, a major cost of production became the preparation of jigs to sufficiently high standards of accuracy to ensure that all the components of 888