Chair framer boring holes in the seat, High Wycombe. The skill in this job was in judging the angles correctly. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, para.2851. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, para.2883. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, para.3755. \*Select Committee on the Copyright of Designs, 1840, para.2885. During the nineteenth century it was not only handicraft production that manufactured variety; so, too, did many mechanised industries. Many cotton print masters who gave evidence to the 1840 Select Committee on design stressed the great number of patterns they produced every year. One printer, who annually introduced between four and five hundred new designs, said 'we endeavour to make a trade by variety rather than by excellence'.\* They were most explicit about their reasons for this policy - as the same printer explained: 'I should expect that the more I sowed, the more I should reap; that the more pains I took in producing new and good things, the more likely I should be to be rewarded by the public for my labour and expense.'\* Another manufacturer, who said he printed around four hundred new designs each year, commented, 'I think I should get more money by continually reproducing styles, as frequently as possible.'\* To these manufacturers, variety of design was a principle of business and the key to profit, for it was the means by which they persuaded their middle-class customers to purchase textiles in excess of their needs. By constantly producing new designs, manufacturers were able to promote fashion; a lady who saw that the material of which her dress was made had become widespread and popular would purchase a new and original design to keep ahead in fashion, even though the first dress might be barely worn. As the same manufacturer who thought that the more he sowed the more he would reap replied when he was asked if he thought more patterns would lead to more dresses being worn: 'I think it is exceedingly probable, because what is a dress after all? It is mere fancy and taste, it is not a mere covering, otherwise we should not have had any printed dresses at all. It is like paintings, there is no reason why a gentleman should possess a painting, but when he sees a good one, he wishes to have it.'\* 90