Seat boring machine, High Wycombe. This machine, introduced in the late nineteenth century, made the chair framer's skill redundant, and, like other machines, discouraged manufacturers from proliferating designs. Theories of Diversity The principle of 'the more I sow, the more I shall reap' belonged in some measure to all manufacturers of consumer goods, whether chairs, cutlery or clocks. Profit was determined by the volume of sale, and, since more designs stimulated fashion, they promised more sales and played an important part in the accumulation of capital. The activity of design was therefore of great assistance to the development of capitalism in industries making consumer goods, supplying the variety that enabled manufacturers constantly to be increasing their sales and their profits. If design was of such great service to capitalism, capitalism has been no less good for design. Not only did it bring design into existence as a necessary activity within the division of labour in manufacturing, but its appetite for novelty and variety guaranteed the prosperity of designers. Capitalism may have been very bad for many crafts and trades, eroding their skills, their status and their rewards, but design is one activity that capitalism has caused to flourish. The tendency for manufacturers to multiply the designs of their products has not gone unnoticed by writers on design. The majority of books on the history of design and the decorative arts are filled with lists of designs produced by one manufacturer or a set of manufacturers. Few historians, however, have made the attempt to explain the reasons for the differences between these many designs. The presence of diversity has usually been taken for granted as normal and therefore, to the mind trained to find interest only in irregularities and curiosities, unworthy of comment. When historians have tried to explain the diversification of designs, they have invariably fallen back on one of two theories. Some have seen the development of new and different designs as the result of the evolution of new needs; for example, the development of new and different designs of spanners - ring spanners, cranked spanners, and socket wrenches - would be explained by the need for tools to assemble and dismantle machinery whose designs had become increasingly complicated and compact. Other historians have attributed the development of new and different designs to the desire of designers to express their ingenuity and artistic talent. Both theories may indeed explain the diversity of designs in particular instances, but they fail to cover all cases. A good example of the all-too-common failure to make sense of the diversification of designs occurs in Siegfried Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command, the only previous attempt to relate design to the history of society in a comprehensive way. Giedion observed the development in mid-nineteenth century America of many designs for the adjustable chair, a novel type of furniture. He tried to explain the introduction of the new type, and the great variety of designs for it, by means of both the standard theories for diversity. He began by arguing that the nineteenth century adopted a new, more relaxed, semi-reclining posture of sitting, in which people sought comfort by constantly shifting their bodies: 'The posture of the nineteenth century... is based on relaxation. This relaxation is found in a free, unposed attitude that can be called neither sitting nor lying. Once again the painters are the first to voice the unconscious inclinations of their time by surprising and capturing their model in this indefinite posture. In a 91