\*Giedion, p.419. of the 'functionalist' theory become even more apparent when applied to other products. Could Montgomery Ward's 131 different designs of pocket knife be said to be the result of the discovery of new ways of cutting? Giedion's second reason for the proliferation of the designs of adjustable chairs was a supposed surge of creative ingenuity amongst designers: 'when creative power comes to life, objects that centuries of use have left unchanged - plows, hammers, saws or furniture - take on a new aspect.'\* This explanation seems even more suspect. The many different designs may reveal great ingenuity on the part of designers, but this is hardly a cause of the proliferation of adjustable chair designs. Why should the rapid multiplication of designs not have occurred at some other time in history? There seems no reason to believe that nineteenth-century designers were more inventive and ingenious than people at other times. However, the greatest weakness of the 'ingenious designer' theory is that it betrays a misunderstanding of the process of design and manufacture, for it attributes to designers a power and autonomy that they do not in practice possess. Designers, unless they also held managerial positions in manufacturing industry would have had no influence on how many or what type of articles should be made, other than to determine their form. The decision to increase the number of designs must, like any other decision about production, rest with the manufacturer. The reason for producing many different designs was that it was profitable for the manufacturer to do so. The arguments which have been advanced in this chapter, unlike the 'functionalist' or 'ingenious designer' theories of diversity, place the products of design in a direct relationship to the ideas of the society in which they are made. The evidence is that manufacturers themselves made distinctions between designs on the basis of different markets: in some cases, as with printed textiles, the manufacturers explicitly acknowledged that they made distinctions of this kind in their production of patterns; in other cases, the classifications in manufacturers' catalogues provide silent testimony of the fact that their various designs were intended for different groups of people. To look at the ranges of goods illustrated in the catalogues of nineteenth century manufacturers, department stores and mail order houses is to look at a representation of society. Through the designs of knives, watches, clothes and furniture to suit every rank and station in life, one can read the shape of society as manufacturers saw it, and as their customers learned to see it. For, like any representation, be it in the form of painting, literature or film, this strange and cumbersome masterpiece created by manufacturing industry not only corresponded to what was seen to exist, but, without recourse to language, metaphor or symbolism, also showed people social boundaries and distinctions that might otherwise have been invisible to them, or to which they might have been indifferent. Yet, unlike the audience for works of art, which is generally only a minority, that for manufactured artefacts in the nineteenth century was enormous: even though people might have possessed only a few of them, or even none, the range of designs would have been familiar to them. And to know the range of different designs was to know an image of society.