5. The Home \*Raymond Chandler, Farewell My Lovely, Harmondsworth, 1949, p.46. \*Grace R. Cooper, The Sewing Machine, Its Invention and Development, 2nd edition, Washington D.C., 1976, is the source for most of the following account. 'We went down three steps to the main part of the living-room. The carpet almost tickled my ankles. There was a concert grand piano, closed down. On one corner of it stood a tall silver vase on a strip of peach-coloured velvet, and a single yellow rose in the vase. There was plenty of nice soft furniture, a great many cushions, some with golden tassels and some just naked. It was a nice room, if you didn't get rough. There was a wide damask covered divan in a shadowy corner, like a casting couch. It was the kind of room where people sit with their feet in their laps and sip absinthe through lumps of sugar and talk with high affected voices and sometimes just squeak. It was a room where anything could happen except work.'\* As Chandler's Philip Marlowe observed, the home, as well as providing shelter, is also an icon. The appearance of its contents makes evident what it is and what people are meant to do, or not do, in it. Ideas about the home vary between cultures and between periods, but at any one time and in any one place, there is likely to be a consensus about what a home should be like, what is right and proper there, and what is out of place. Notions of what is proper, and therefore beautiful, in the home have shaped the design of articles for domestic use. However, the relationship also works in the other direction: as well as conforming to the consensus of taste, designs tell people what they ought to think about the home and how they ought to behave there. A good example of the kind of influence that ideas of domestic propriety can have upon the appearance of objects is the sewing machine, which, in its early history, presented manufacturers with great problems through the need to distinguish domestic machines from those for industrial use. The first sewing machines were manufactured in the United States in the early 1850s. All the main mechanical inventions used in sewing machines until the 1890s were patented between 1846 and 1850, and so, by the late 1850s, there was no difficulty in making a reliable and efficient machine employing any combination of about half a dozen basic principles of machine sewing.\* However, since the early machines were individually made by handicraft methods, they were costly and were thus sold almost exclusively for industrial use, where the expense could be justified. Yet, as the sewing-machine manufacturers found to their cost, the market for industrial machines was limited and rapidly satisfied. Singer & Co. did very badly in the mid-1850s, when they were selling only industrial machines: in spite of extremely grand premises in New York and agents across the country, they sold only 810 94