## Preface The book is far from dead. The tactile values of ink on paper, of carefully designed covers, of lavish typography and production quality retain their appeal in a world which is still charmed by the analogue, despite the triumph of the digital. But I am not so sure about the dictionary, which does indeed look as if its print format is moribund. Seven years ago, at just about the time I became the director of the Design Museum in London, I signed a contract with my current British publisher to do two books. The first, titled the Language of Things, came relatively easily. It gave me the chance to explore the various messages, from gender to politics, that design can express. Book two was more of a problem. The commission was to deliver a massive 250,000-word conventional dictionary of design. It was daunting, and it took a while to get started – by hiring an assistant to get into the research. But a couple of years later my publisher’s managing director called me: “People have stopped buying dictionaries,” he said. “There is this thing called Wikipedia. Of course you can keep the advance, and if you really want to, go ahead and do a dictionary. But really, you might think about something else.” And there it was: the dictionary had become the first victim of the digital explosion in publishing. B is for Bauhaus, Y is for YouTube is what finally emerged from that hiatus. And it isn’t a dictionary. The dictionary once gave the appearance of objectivity; but few dictionaries have been read for pleasure. B is for Bauhaus … takes the apparently banal format of an alphabetically ordered A-to-Z to structure a series of essays that explores what are, at least for me, some of the essential ideas that underpin the meanings of contemporary design and architecture. It’s also a chance to use my own experiences – reading Reyner Banham for the first time as a schoolboy in West London, starting Blueprint magazine with Peter Murray and Simon Esterson – in many of those essays. I remembered the day I saw Wally Olins and Michael Wolff capture the essence of branding when they mocked up a bottle of aspirin in a typographic style associated with whisky, and vice versa. I reflected on my first job at the Sunday Times, writing the obituary of my formidably talented predecessor Ian Nairn, and at the fickleness with which critical reputations are treated. It allowed me to explore the concept of authenticity from the moment I was seduced into buying a vintage Korean War–era US Army parka. Not because it was a chance to revisit the youth that I never had as a Vespa-riding mod, even though I grew up in the same west London suburb as The Who, but because in its apparent rejection of the obvious seductions of consumerism, the parka – with its narrative label in the place of a brand, its impressive brass zip, complete with six-inch fabric cord, designed to be manipulated by hands protected from the cold by gloves – had the charms of authenticity. It is the quality that all designers value and pursue, and through their endless exploration of it, make its very presence impossible. Design’s pursuit of authenticity, in fact, makes designers into endlessly inventive fakers. Proceeding through the alphabet, this book does indeed touch upon “B is for Bauhaus,” but as much through an exploration of the significance of a massive exhibition catalogue for the Bauhaus show I saw in London as a schoolboy as through an objective appraisal of the movement. I am equally fascinated by the significance of collection, of the squalor of car interiors, and the impact of a Qwerty keyboard on my approach to writing. This is a book that reflects my life over the last thirty years as a critic and a curator, and is written from the vantage point of the Design Museum. There is no better place to look at the constantly fluctuating, endlessly fascinating world of design.