# FIS FOR FASH ION The first item of clothing with any kind of fashion ambition that I can remember buying for myself was a corduroy tie, printed with a vivid turquoise paisley pattern. It was not the kind of thing that you would want to keep after its moment had passed. Nor was the four-inch-wide hipster belt with orange-and-yellow-zigzag stripes on its fabric inlay, and a big rectangular metal buckle, or the donkey jacket, or the sharkskinprint suede boots. They were the kind of thing that on a Saturday night you could add to a wardrobe based on a sensible brown tweed jacket with leather-covered buttons to make some tip of the cap towards fashion, in a way that was affordable on a teenage budget and would not lead to parental ostracism. Fashion in the London of the late 1960s was a matter of social and sometimes even physical survival. It was the means to signal allegiance to the values of one tribe against the others, and so to claim its protection. For me it was the choice between Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band and Chelsea Football Club. It was either try to look like the Beatles, or sign up as a skinhead, with a Ben Sherman shirt, Dr Martens cherry-red boots and Sta Prests. I did, briefly, try a crop that left each hair on my scalp so short that it was standing perpendicular to my skull, but football was not for me. Instead, I remember a particularly impressive music teacher rushing into class with the Sgt Pepper album on the day it went on sale. He played both sides from start to finish in an overwhelming burst of enthusiasm that left a deep impression on me. A Grenadier Guards red tunic from I was Lord Kitchener’s Valet, the stall at the top of the Portobello Road, was out of reach financially. But a Civil Defence greatcoat from the Laurence Corner army surplus store behind Euston station was the next best thing, and could be presented to parents as both practical and economical. Second-hand clothes were the staple of university life. I had a Swedish army sheepskin, which I sold when my student grant ran out, and something a far hipper student than I described as a ‘canoe-club blazer’. Then came brushed denim, T-shirts with American-football-style numerals, worn with desert boots that laced up to mid-calf and beyond, but were invisible under narrow-leg pink needle-cord jeans, and finally a brown velvet suit, along with a pair of art nouveau-style cufflinks from Biba. The jacket had the exaggerated tulip-shaped lapels of the period that certainly stood out at pubclosing time in the streets of Edinburgh. The trousers flared out at the ankle to cover almost entirely the green platform-heel boots, and hovered just above the ground in the manner of the shadow-gap skirtings that were later to be such a feature of John Pawson’s architecture. It was the glam-rock alternative to the dominant mode of student dress, which involved collarless shirts and a certain amount of Fair Isle knitwear. None of these once essential aspects of my identity as an adolescent survive. Nor do the shirts that I bought, then and much later. They represent a personal history of taste, one that I hesitate to call my own. It’s a history that spans fabrics from Aertex to cheesecloth, from madras cotton and linen to whatever the rubbery fibres that Miuccia Prada has woven into her mad-scientist lab-technician outfits. But shirts never last. What is left are the things that are harder to discard, the clothes that bring back particular moments that still seem too significant to consign to the thrift shop, even after thirty years. The oldest-surviving garment that I still have hanging in my wardrobe was, at the time that I bought it, punishingly expensive. It is a jacket made from corduroy so heavy-duty and so stiff that it was once fully capable of standing up on its own. It came from Margaret Howell, a kind of anti-fashion fashion designer, who based her look on those student Fair Isle knits. She made Far from the Madding Crowd trousers that had curious flaps at the back to hold your braces in place. I preferred her brightly coloured check wool shirts, which were less specifically period. But the jacket – I wore it with equally imposing corduroy trousers that expired long ago – had professorial leather patches already in place on the elbows, as well as leather edging to the cuffs. It had an impressive array of pockets, and was made so conspicuously well that thirty years later I can still wear it. Only now it has actually achieved the wellworn patched-and-faded look that it was aiming for when it was new, but had not yet earned. Not long after that purchase, I bought my first – and only – dinner jacket from Crolla in Dover Street. Scott Crolla started one of the great fashion might-have-beens with Georgina Godley. In 1983 there was nothing else quite like it, a kind of grown-up baroque idea of glamour, the sort of place that you could imagine Bryan Ferry coming in to change his suit. There was a branch in Tokyo before you knew it. But Crolla signed an ill-advised contract which did not allow him to hedge against currency fluctuations. Because not many people make more than occasional use of them, dinner jackets, once the casual alternative to evening dress, tend to outlive the style that they were born with, and so have a way of always looking outdated. People who bought one in the 1960s will have inappropriate colour schemes. Others dating back to the 1950s have the look of Demob suits and utility clothing. When I bought mine, its fashion content lay in the way it quietly hinted at the recent past, with turned-back buttoned cuffs on the jacket. By this time I had been through a couple of suits after the brown velvet. There was the loud check pattern with enormous notched lapels from the Village Gate, worn, I am reluctant to admit, on at least one occasion with an outsize brown pre-tied bow tie with cream polka dots. It was followed by my first Paul Smith suit, acquired from a shop in Bath along with a Paul Smith tie and shirt. I knew there was something special about it. This was Smith even before he had discovered the classic with a twist idea. It was the kind of outfit that Phillip Marlowe could have worn to patrol the mean streets of LA. A double-breasted jacket with pointed lapels, a cream-coloured shirt with a very small collar, and an argyle-pattern tie. Actually it was the kind of suit that my father had worn in the 1940s, though I was only hazily aware of that when I bought it. Paul Smith shortly afterwards opened his first shop in Covent Garden, from where the vegetable market was still in the final stages of withdrawal. It had bare concrete walls, Italian lights with outsize milky glass shades, and a window to the street that Smith filled with slide projections. I got to know Smith when I was editing Blueprint. He was in the midst of expanding throughout Japan, which in the mid-1980s was still in the throes of the bubble years, when Japan as Number One was the title of a book written by an American sociologist, when it was possible for Japanese companies to buy anything. Life in Japan was as mysterious as life on Mars. We flew out on the weekend of the Chernobyl disaster. It was on that trip that he introduced me to Rei Kawakubo, his polar opposite in terms of her approach to fashion at Comme des Garçons. I was fascinated by a woman who could countenance a shop so reduced to its minimum essence that there was nothing at all to see, just a counter. If you asked for anything, it would be brought out for inspection from behind a screen. I ended up writing a monograph that involved following her through a collection from design to textile selection to Paris show. And that is how I come to have a jacket from the 1989 Homme Plus collection that she gave me. The silhouette looks exaggeratedly bulky now, with shoulders that cantilever over my arms, but at first sight there is nothing else trickily Japanese about it. And then you notice that it is actually two jackets. The inner lining is a check-patterned blouson with long sleeves and elasticated cuffs that can be buttoned into the outer jacket. It comes with a wealth of secret pockets. Flying back from Tokyo via the Polar route, I put the jacket on during the refuelling stop at Anchorage, and spent the rest of the way home feeling smug that it would be the only one of its kind anywhere in Britain. Almost as old, and still hanging in my wardrobe, worn rather more often than the Comme jacket – which has finally started to fray at the edges, despite the formidable Japanese craftsmanship and attention to detail that went into it – is the Paul Smith suit I bought myself after a lengthy lunch to celebrate my fortieth birthday. It’s grey wool, and made in Italy. While wearing it is no embarrassment in style terms, it has gone from sharp to distinctly cosy over the years. The shirts have all gone. I can remember the ones I liked wearing, and could never find anything to replace them once the collars started to fracture. Long ago there was a candy-striped cotton shirt with wide collars from Austin Reed. Much later there was the searingly fluorescent pink shirt from Comme des Garçons. There are a few ties, mostly with broad horizontal stripes. At the time of purchase, these were not the kind of things that seemed as if they had anything to do with fashion. They just made you feel better. But they are fashion moments. Mostly they are focused not on shirt collars but on the fluctuating diameter of trouser legs. I can remember when the skin-tight needlecords started to sprout flares: in the most egregious examples with contrasting-fabric insets; and then I can remember the day when skinny legs suddenly looked acceptable again, closely followed by narrow ties. Britain’s default position is to look down on those who try too hard with their clothes, but to look down even harder at those who get them wrong. I find it difficult to buy clothes, and tend to do it in short bursts, followed by years of inactivity. Armani passed me by; but I did eventually catch up with Prada, at about the same time that Miuccia Prada hired Rem Koolhaas and Jacques Herzog to design her shops, and then with Jill Sander’s sternly Teutonic version of modernism. The most recent example is the raincoat that I bought in a Hong Kong discount outlet, a 28- storey concrete hulk that was once a multi-storey factory. When Shenzhen set up as a manufacturing centre, such places went out of business, and this particular example has found a new life as fashion’s equivalent of limbo. Far away from the glossy stores of Hong Kong Central, with their travertine floors and their exquisite window displays, here in Aberdeen is rack upon rack of the clothes that the boutiques cannot shift before the next season’s collections come in. The price tags have three dates on them, past each date there is another 20 per cent off. I like my raincoat. It’s made of the kind of rubberized black gaberdine that the police used to wear back in the 1950s. There are popper-stud fastenings backed up by a zip hidden behind the fly front. The silhouette is stylishly severe, with the pockets neatly flush with the surface. There are metal eyelets and a discreet collar. And then there is the vivid pink lining. I like wearing it every day, but I know that I am shortening its life. So I try to extend its stay in my wardrobe by rationing its outings, to ensure that it maintains the crisp outlines its makers intended it to have. And I know that sooner or later it will be making way for something new.