## Acknowledgements This book began as a conventional dictionary. That turned out to be a category that was one of the first casualties of the digital explosion that has overtaken publishing. But Stefan McGrath, who had the idea of doing it in the first place, always encouraged a certain degree of subjectivity. With the support of my editor, Helen Conford, that subjectivity, or enthusiasm, is the starting point for this book. Much of this book is based on the places I have seen, and the people I have talked to over the years as an editor, first at Blueprint, then at Domus. When I was at the Observer, Jane Ferguson was a particularly encouraging editor, dispatching me to meet Nathaniel Kahn in California, and to write about returning to Belgrade, among many other things. The London Review of Books gave me the chance to reflect on Léon Krier. Elena Foster got me thinking about the complex relationship between artists and architects. Johanna Agerman Ross of Disegno was responsible for my meeting Orhan Pamuk. Rolf Fehlbaum’s elegant speech at the Boymans Museum in Rotterdam raised the issue of imperfection for me. Debating the rights and wrongs of Ruskin with Grayson Perry at Charleston (I lost, humiliatingly), made me re-read The Seven Lamps of Architecture. Ricky Burdett of the LSE’s Urban Age project got me to Mumbai to see Dharavi. Ron Arad took me to see the museum he designed in Holon. But above all the Design Museum where I have worked ever since I started writing this book has been the best possible vantage point from which to explore the contemporary world of architecture and design. B is for Bauhaus, Y is for YouTube for Critical Design D is f F is for Fashion F is for I Grand Theft Auto H is fc J is for Jim Nature J is fo Kitchen K is for Krier L i: Manifesto M is for Muse National Identity O is foi Post Modern Q is for QV S is for Sottsass T is for Utzon V is for Vienna W for Youtube Z is for Zip Deyan Sudjic Designing the Modern World from A to Z