# SEARS.ROEBUCKCHEAPEST SUPPLY HOUSE WITH A CAPITAL OF \$150.000.00 PAID IN FULL REFERENCE BY SPECIAL PERMISS NATL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC CH METROPOLITAN NAT'L BANK NAT'L BANKOF ILLINOIS GERMAN EXCHANCE BANK NEW CONSUMERS GUIDE 42 Cover of Sears, Roebuck Fall catalogue, 1897. The cornucopia was an apt image for the vast range of goods it made available to remote areas sales techniquc that it stimulated. Mass-production required massconsumption, and there followed the establishment of department stores in cities, and later, mail order firms such as Montgomery Ward, founded in 1872, and Sears, Roebuck, founded in 1886. Both were established in Chicago at the hub of the railway system, and sold a vast range of products that catered for all a family's needs, across a wide geographical area. With such highly competitive methods of selling, aesthetic appearance became a vital means of attracting interest. All tastes had to be catered for, and ever more complex and detailed effects became technically possible. The Montgomery Ward catalogue of 1895 offered fifty-six different kinds of clocks, many by leading manufacturers such as Seth Thomas and the Waterbury company, ranging from simple alarm clocks to extravagantly decorated wall and mantel models, the casing finishes including oak, walnut, enamelled iron and gilt. Different exterior forms often housed the same movement, as with the 'Dakota' and 'Cato' models. Sears, Roebuck followed a similar policy. The 19o6 catalogue section on sewing machines contained a paragraph under the heading 'Design' for each machine and cabinet, commenting on the 'Minnesota B' model that it was 'extremely handsome and pleasing in appearance, the general design being worked out in easy curves and rounded corners so as to avoid any suggestions of harshness or angularity'. The cabinet was described as a 'model of beauty and artistic design'. Towards the end of the century, the full consciousness of the extent to which mechanization and the American system were effecting a transformation of the environment led to attempts to arrive at a machineaesthetic. An important figure in formulating and disseminating this aesthetic was the architect Frank Lloyd Wright. He had worked under Louis Sullivan, whose famous dictum 'form follows function' was to become one of the great polemical slogans of modern architecture and design. Often misinterpreted as expressing a somewhat crude structural and aesthetic determinism, Sullivan's phrase, in the context of his argument, was an attempt to formulate a concept of organic unity in architecture in which function, structure and appropriate decoration could be fused to give an artistic expression appropriate to the modern age. Wright adopted and developed this organic concept, and his early independent work included designs for furniture and fittings intended to be an integral part of the houses he designed. These, like his buildings, were based on the massing of simple elements. The chair built for his studio around 1 895 by a Milwaukee cabinetmaker was an expression of Wright's interest at that time in the Arts and Crafts movement and in handicraft. He came to realize, however, that the clean, straight lines of his furniture could be better achieved by the precision