Chapter 12 # Changing Times/ Altered States It is a truism to say that when we change our clothes we change our selves. Nonetheless – as Adorned in Dreams sets out to demonstrate - the role of dress in the theatre of life is extraordinarily important. There is no culture in which this has not been so, yet today both the cultural role played by clothes and the ways in which we acquire them have changed enormously. ‘Getting dressed’ in the modern world is a matter of bricolage, of the coming together of garments and accessories that we have usually not made ourselves, combined to create a finished appearance'. Every individual is a walking collage, an artwork of found items’ – or perhaps something closer to a contemporary installation, changing as it interacts with its audience. The rise of the bourgeoisie and with it consumer society provided the motor for the expansion of fashion. Beverly Lemire and Negley B Harte¹ have demonstrated that a ready made clothing trade was already flourishing in the late seventeenth century. This development led in turn to the publication of the first magazines to interpret fashion to the novice. Fashion journalism grew in parallel with its subject. This was already the case in the nineteenth century, but fashion writing and images of fashion have expanded exponentially since then, so that today newspapers, fashion magazines, television programmes and the internet bombard us with information and advice on dress and appearance. We are saturated with images of fashion. Fashion’ is racks of garments we can touch and feel in the department store or the high street boutique, but it is equally a virtual spectacle, a regime of images, celebrating a continual carnival of change. Nor is it simply that styles change over time, or that these stylistic changes are a matter of surface only. The way in which clothes are made of course also changes, as do the materials from which they are constructed; as a result, the value of clothing has changed; once a pair of silk stockings would be cherished, but now a pair of tights can cost less than a bus ticket. The social meanings of dress have likewise changed; dress marks social class, age and even gender less strictly than was formerly the case, but although the signs are subtler, they are still there to be read. It is the styles, above all, that leap to mind when fashion change is discussed. When Adorned in Dreams was published in 1985, women ‘dressed for success' in the boom – as did men. The City or Wall Street Yuppie was a figure of the times, in a brash, big-cut suit and bright tie, edging towards Miami Vice, with flowing mullet hairstyles above square jackets in light colours with the cuffs inexplicably rolled back. Black was seen everywhere on city streets: it had dominated for more than one hundred years,2 but now we were more self-conscious about it. Punk had strangely mutated into a style fit for Thatcherism – hard lipstick, hard haircuts, high heels – and this era of power dressing with its big hair, shoulder pads and echoes of Dallas and Dynasty was associated with the rightwing politics of the Reagan/Thatcher governments. Yet tabloid newspapers warned Essex girls' to avoid white stilettos and tarty miniskirts, for the affluent 1980s revelled in, yet disavowed vulgarity. By 1990 the mood had changed. The decade began with white as the colour of the catwalks, interpreted as a gesture in the direction of ecology and reverence for the Planet, and this was swiftly followed by ‘grunge', which equally signified thrifty recycling and the rejection of conspicuous consumption. A decade earlier there had been the ‘recession style’ of the revolutionary Japanese designers, such as Comme des Garçons, who used black cloth and complex shapes that shrouded instead of outlining the body. Now Grunge emerged as an appropriate response to the recession of the early nineties. Grunge had originated with Seattle West Coast bands such as Nirvana, but was soon taken up by a group of British fashion journalists operating in New York. Anna Cockburn, fashion editor of Mademoiselle in 1993, looked ‘as though she sleeps rough', wrote Marion Hume in the London Independent on Sunday.4 Cockburn was photographed in an army surplus greatcoat, her hair caught back with a rubber band. Hume reported that the fashion avant garde was wearing jumble sale outfits, sneakers and shrunken sweaters - but significantly these were mixed with garments designed by the new Belgian ‘deconstructionist' designers, Ann Demeulemeester and Martin Margiela, so that the poor look was notional rather than actual. Moreover, the impulse behind grunge – a partial return to hippie thrift, androgyny and bricolage – was different from that of deconstruction fashion (or ‘mode destroy’ as it was sometimes called), a more intellectual approach, which literally unpicked fashion, exposing its operations, its relation to the body and at the same time to the structures and discourses of fashion.⁵ By the mid 1990s grunge had evolved – or declined – into boho chic'. This was promoted by, among others, the London shop, Voyage, who designed luxury garments often from recycled and exotic materials. The bohemian style of the fin de siècle reworked the hippy idiom at great expense to create a fey, disordered appearance, suitable for an artist's mood or a minor actress playing Peaseblossom in A Midsummer Nights Dream. At one party, the author noted a guest in a tight black and silver lace bodice and lace skirt with an uneven hem line, thigh high at the front and knee length at the back, worn over very tight black pedal pushers. Another woman wore green silk, embroidered in pink and silver and overlaid with ragged net. With these ensembles went deliberately mussed-up hairstyles and strange flowers. Overheard in the ladies' lavatory was a mournful conversation about being barred from Voyage: the shop had by this time become so grand that for a while they operated a membership policy. (Monica Lewinsky, also a guest at this party, had adopted an equally extreme but completely different style as, dressed in a strapless black tulle ballerina style cocktail dress and scarlet satin stole, she appeared to have stepped straight out of the 1950s.) An alternative take on the bohemian' approach to fashion was to go for second-hand. For hundreds of years the second-hand clothing market thrived, but with the advent of mass production it faded. It was revived by the hippies of the late 1960s, and in the seventies the fashion correspondent of the New Yorker, Kennedy Fraser, had suggested that retro-dressing represents the desire to find style, but obliquely ... and to put an ironic distance between the wearers and the fashionableness of their clothes ... an air of saying something quite intense but only in a footnote’.6 In other words retro was an act of sartorial disavowal, a way of simultaneously following fashion and not following it. A decade later the feminist academic Kaja Silverman saw it as rather more radical than that, ‘as a sartorial strategy that works to denaturalise its wearer's specular identity, and one which is fundamentally irreconcilable with fashion'.7 This was over-optimistic, for by the millennium it had been commercialised and ancient ‘frocks' that would once have cost £l now cost thousands. Julia Roberts wore a ‘vintage’Valentino gown to the 2001 Oscar ceremony, but, reported the London Evening Standard, ‘fashion types are one step ahead. They don't want Sixties or Seventies designer labels. Instead they pounce on Eighties high-street pieces – “high hand" as it's called by those in the know.'8 Soon this trend too had migrated from obscure retro and charity shops to the contemporary high street with the very successful British Top Shop chain leading the way at its Oxford Circus branch by opening its own vintage department. Grunge and Boho paved the way for the more casual styles of dress that were creeping in towards the end of the twentieth century. Writing in 1994 Naomi Tarrant noted that many young men did not even own a formal suit9 (although this may have more to do with age than constituting a permanent change). The American custom of dress down Friday' expanded into generally more casual styles for the office. What to wear to work was still an issue, but by the late 1990s the solution, for women, was more likely to be an unstructured cardigan and drawstring skirt or trousers than the in-your-face suits of the eighties. David Brooks wittily described the origins of the casual style in Silicon Valley and its spread to ‘Latte Towns’ all over the United States. Latte Towns, he explained, were communities, often associated with a university, where formerly bohemian modes of life had fused with bourgeois wealth, work ethic and aspirations, and the bourgeois-bohemian lifestyle extended to dress: the local businessmen gather for breakfast each morning, wearing timberlands, no socks, collarless shirts and jeans. An executive with flowing gray hair [in a pony tail] will be chatting amiably with another who sports a Jerry Garcia beard, their cell phones tucked into their black canvas briefcases. The Birkenstock sandal store around the corner will have a sign in the window pointing out that its wares make nice corporate gifts.'10 The women's sartorial equivalent would be granny glasses and peasant garb. According to this new set of rules and sumptuary codes, says Brooks, ‘it is acceptable to spend hundreds of dollars on top-ofthe-line hiking boots, but it would be vulgar to buy top-of-theline patent leather shoes to go with formal wear.’ Whereas the 1980s yuppies liked ‘smooth surfaces – matt black furniture, polished lacquer floors and sleek faux-marbleised walls’ today the educated elites prefer to build environments full of natural irregularities ... roughness connotes authenticity and virtue'. This rule extends to clothes so that Bobos (short for bourgeois bohemians') must wear flannel shirts, not silk, relaxed, not starched collars, linen slacks with marled blouse, Peruvian folk knits, ‘a hemp baseball cap ... and sisal underwear', thus keeping down with the Joneses'.11 Stealth wealth' was another form ofbourgeois bohemian' dressing, ‘inconspicuous consumption' as Gilles Lipovetsky called it.12 Vanessa Friedman in the short-lived British fashion magazine, Frank, commented on the trend in September 1998. Describing a smart London City couple, she estimated that between them they were wearing over £6000.00 of clothes and jewellery, but at first glance no-one would have guessed it: Dick is wearing basic brownleather brogues, a standard two-button blue suit, and a utilitarian steel watch; Jane is wearing a ratty old twinset, grey trousers, sandals and a green bead on a string around her neck.’ The green bead, however, is a cabochon emerald on a gold wire and the watch is a TAG-Heuer 6000 Chronometer Chronograph, alone worth nearly £2,000. The twinset is Comme des Garçons, the suit bespoke, and so on: luxury materials have combined with minimalist design to create exclusivity. The designer Marc Jacobs summed it up when he said: 'I decided that status would be done my way, which is to say, invisibly.'13 In the year 2000 style sections of newspapers were full of articles on the new casual, with much advice for men on how to dress down successfully. The British prime minister, Tony Blair, declared his preference for jeans over formal suits, and underlined this in March 2002 by appearing at a barbecue for Commonwealth leaders in a casual Nicole Farhi sweater, but career casual' appeared to be full of pitfalls. In ditching the suit, Wall Street, it seemed, created confusion in employees and soon a new set of rules had to be devised. The new casual did not mean dirty trainers and unpressed khakis, and by 2001 the London Observer reported that ‘dress-down Friday is all washed up'; a survey they quoted had revealed that casual dress not only meant more time spent wondering what to wear, but led to unwork-like behaviour at the office. Flirting, gossip and general laziness were the result, and anyway, who wanted to be ‘generation bland', clad in what was simply a new and less sexy uniform of khakis and t-shirts. In 2002 ‘smart casual’ or ‘casual elegant' was defined by a menswear salesman in the London department store, Selfridges, as a good suit, but worn with a shirt open at the neck and without a tie (a style now favoured by some British television journalists on location, although anchor news presenters still wear ties14). So the suit has not been defeated. Anne Hollander, arguing that the classic suit is still essentially a man's garment, celebrated it for its classic modernity, its ability to clothe the male figure in exquisitely subdued authority: ‘it suggests diplomacy, compromise, civility and physical self-control'. She also drew attention to an aspect of the suit less often noted: its projection of masculine eroticism.15 The suit, now widely worn by women as well as men, was one form taken by the increasing androgyny of clothes in the 1990s, but the casual look was equally androgynous. On a summer's day in the late 1990s as I waited for a bus in London's Oxford Street, I looked at the passing crowds and thought: this is already the twenty first century. I had just emerged from an exhibition at the London College of Fashion of the wardrobe from the 1950s and 1960s of Mrs Korner, the wife of a London banker. How different were her structured couture outfits from what I saw around me, for swirling by were young men and women out of Neuromancer.16 Multiethnic, they wore a uniform of jeans or combat trousers, cotton t-shirts, casual fleeces or zipped cotton tops. Startling effects had been achieved at the periphery – crazy pink and purple hair-dos, baroque trainers, flamboyant make-up, tattoos – and sexual difference was still marked by lower t-shirt décolletage and glimpses of (often pierced) belly buttons for the women. With their mini-disc players, mobile phones and clumsy backpacks, which transformed wearers into single humped camels, these young men and women seemed like forerunners of a cyborg world, the cell-phone presaging the chip in the brain or the tooth, the backpack part of a mutating body that might soon develop its own pouches and pockets. Another feature of contemporary fashion is the way in which the eclectic mixing up of styles has become endemic. As Anne Hollander has expressed it: A post-modern person, now one of either sex, has ... learned that not only may disparate wardrobes cohabit in one person's closet ... but they may now be [re]combined ... old denim and fresh spangles or pale chiffon and black combat boots are worn not just in quick succession but together. The new freedom of fashion in the last quarter-century has been taken up as a chance not to create new forms, but to play more or less outrageously with all the tough and solid old ones ... [with] a pulsating tide of mixed references.17 The problem with this is that when everything is allowed, nothing actually seems outrageous any more, and the free wheeling, overlapping' style remix on the high street can look quite bland, blending with androgyny to create a strangely uniform look. Androgyny is still more or less confined to younger age groups. In any case, the discourse of fashion continues to neglect the dress of older men and women, but in thirty years time today's cyborgs may be wearing suits and pleated skirts like their parents. On the other hand, they may not be: casual’ has already invaded old age. Men and women in their sixties and seventies are now as likely to wear jeans, trainers, track suits and fleeces as their grandchildren, but sports wear needs a young, fit body to show to advantage; track suits can infantilise the old, consigning them to a second childhood by dressing them in outsize baby-gro' outfits. On the other hand where women in their forties and fifties would once have put fashion behind them and (even if not widowed) shrouded themselves in black, now fashion is available to all age groups, and disapproval of mutton dressed as lamb’ has evaporated.18 The spread of androgyny through the 1990s was an irony at a time when feminism was in retreat. There was a widespread, but superficial assumption that women had achieved feminism's goals. Rather as in the 1920s, young women behaved with greater freedom in their leisure time, yet inequalities at work and in the home hardly changed. Rates of domestic violence had remained static since the 1970s; women's pay was at all levels less than men's; and women still did most of the housework and childcare. For the better off, having it all' meant having all the work; while poorer women continued, as they had always done, to combine low paid work with household drudgery. The difference from the 1970s was the return of the servant class; the ‘time poor' (rich women) now employed a new generation of female servants to clean their homes and look after their children – even if the new domestics were as likely to be students from Eastern Europe as members of the indigenous working class. Feminism declined through inertia and complacency, but it also came more explicitly (if still covertly) under attack from another, scientific quarter. Scientists and ideologues promoted sociobiology and evolutionary psychology to argue for the importance of genetic differences between the sexes, and these ideas were marshalled to suggest that women, not to mention their children and husbands, would be happier and better off if they abandoned the search for equality and learned to revel in difference. Evolutionary psychology undercuts the continued public lip service paid to female equality, thus expressing the unabated ambivalence in the west (let alone elsewhere) towards genuine female equality. The obvious question is seldom posed: that whether or not genetic and hormonal differences between men and women are as significant as some theorists insist, should a society seek to reinforce or minimise them? Status and gender divisions and inequalities are still - if less fiercely than even thirty years ago – expressed through clothing rules. In 1999 a British schoolgirl took her mixed-sex school to the Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) because girls at the school were not allowed to wear trousers. The headmaster backed down, realising that the EOC would support the student, but covered his defeat by suggesting – absurdly – that boys at his school might in future find themselves wearing skirts. In January 2000 an employee of the British Professional Golf Association took and won a discrimination case against the Association after being sent home for wearing trousers. These bitterly contested disputes demonstrate the extent of resistance, even today, to female autonomy, the intensity with which dress ‘speaks' women's demand for equality, and the resentment this arouses. As if to compensate for the neutrality of androgynous day wear, fashion maintained its glamour by means of a hectic relationship with celebrity and its cult. Women might be boys by day, but catwalk shows, first nights and the Hollywood Oscar ceremonies provided opportunities for displays of the marriage of haute couture and fame. In 2002 the Oscar gowns were less revealing than in previous years, when some of Julien Macdonald's creations were so skimpy that they more closely resembled body cosmetics than garments. In the year 2000 the fashion journalist Lisa Armstrong, asked to nominate a ‘dress of the year' for the Bath Costume Museum, chose Donatella Versace's green bamboo-printed chiffon coat, worn by Geri Halliwell, the model Christy Turlingham, Jennifer Lopez and Amber Valetta. The see-through garment was open from neck to hem, caught together with a large brooch only at the crotch. Armstrong argued that it perfectly symbolised the symbiosis of celebrity and the fashion industry, which she describes as being obsessed with celebrity endorsement'.19 The Hollywood Oscar ceremonies marks the most intense moment of this relationship. The yearly event might be described as a tournament of value'. Arjun Appadurai used this anthropological term, which originally described prestigious ceremonies in Oceania, to refer to western events, such as art auctions. They are: Complex periodic events that are removed in some culturally welldefined way from the routincs of economic life. Participation in them is likely to be both a privilege of those in power and an instrument of status contests between them. The currency of such tournaments is also likely to be set apart through well understood cultural [conventions] ... at issue ... is not just status, rank, fame or reputation ... but the disposition of the central tokens of value in the society in question.20 The annual Hollywood Oscars Ceremony is just such a tournament'. The display of fabulous haute couture garments worn by stars whose toned bodies have been epilated, exercised, surgically altered and cosmeticised into Barbie doll perfection, constitutes an expression of power and wealth in an aesthetic form, not only or even perhaps primarily of the stars, the designers and the directors of the award winning films, but even more significantly of the agents, producers and other money-men behind the scenes. To some, the semi-nudity of the (female of course) actors21 may seem vulgar and garish, and there has been a backlash against the way in which 'naked is the new black'. Journalist Sarah Vine pointed out that the near nakedness of the stars on display had nothing to do with sex and everything to do with showing off an impossibly slender body,22 while on the same day and again in reaction to the ‘gown’ consisting of a bikini and some net worn by singer Caprice at a pop music award show, Zoë Williams deplored the vulgarity and added that the appearance of one star guest actually fully dressed made the ‘naked chicks' look like hookers."23 The cult of ‘scantily clad’ celebrities gives substance to one of the main objections to western culture made by its Muslim critics: its immodesty and decadence. In no area have the rules of dress been more fiercely debated than in relation to Islam, and even more so since the destruction in 2001 of the World Trade Center in New York, a catastrophe that ushered in a heightened and contradictory awareness of Islam in western societies. Alexandra Shulman, editor of British Vogue, felt that: The [nineteenth century] debate about corsets is in many ways reminiscent of the modern coņtroversy about the various extinguishing robes worn by Muslim women. Are they imposed, or adopted? Are they a sign of sexual exploitation and powerlessness, or do they, as many women have said, confer a sort of power, freeing the wearer from the more insidious obligations of western dress, and the sexual appraisal of strangers?’24 As with the nineteenth century corset, while some women chafe against the oppression of a garment that must be worn in order to retain one's respectability, others would hate to appear without it. When Lady Mary Wortley Montagu travelled to Turkey in 1717 she visited the women's hot baths in Sofia. There, she reported, not only did her riding habit appear ‘very extraordinary' to the Turkish women, who were nonetheless too polite to comment upon it, but they were shocked when she showed them ‘my stays, which satisfied 'em very well, for I saw they believ'd I was so lock'd up in that machine that it was not in my own power to open it, which contrivance they attributed to my husband.'25 The Turkish women were horrified by what they perceived as some kind of chastity belt imposed by the tyranny of Europan husbands. The veil antedates Islam by thousands of years, but has today become exclusively associated with Muslim practices – although there is no general agreement among Qur’anic scholars as to what form of dress is actually enjoined for women in the sacred texts. For example, ‘some Muslim theologians and leaders, like Soheib Ben Cheikh, the Grand Mufti of Marseilles, have argued that the Qur’anic injunction on women to veil themselves should not be taken literally, and today should be understood as prescribing education for women'.26 The veil is not a fashion' in the western sense of being subject to rapid stylistic change (although it can be, and often is, worn over western fashion garments). On the contrary, it might be seen as an anti-fashion, or as the other' of fashion, and as a traditional, static form of dress associated with non-western cultures. Yet, as Naseem Khan has shown in relation to various styles of South Asian dress, the shalwar kameez and the sari have been subject to change.27 The traditional Japanese kimono or kosedo also changed over time.28 Thus the western image of the dress of other cultures as static has always been inaccurate. The western style cycle is specific to Europe and the United States, but everywhere styles have evolved, albeit more slowly. Indeed, as we shall see, the veil itself has not been immune to consumerism with its commitment to stylistic change – and versions of traditional dress’ have increasingly been worn by prominent western women in public. Princess Diana wore a shalwar kameez when visiting her friend Jemima Khan, wife of Imram Khan, the former cricketer and Pakistani politician. Jemima Khan wears traditional dress in Pakistan, and western dress in Europe and the United States. Cherie Blair has worn a saree when entertaining the prominent Indian businessmen, the Kinduja brothers. It remains to be seen whether such superficial gestures will develop into forms of fashion that combine western and non-western styles; as Naseem Khan pointed out, the shalwar kameez does have similarities with the fashionable woman's trouser suit in the west and has come to be similarly used as smart urban workwear in India. Geography as well as ideology has determined the kinds of veil that have been worn in different societies – there are many varieties of veil and many words for these coverings. For example the term burqah, today associated with Afghanistan, is actually an Arabic word and Afghans would be more likely to use the word chaadaree’,29 to describe a garment that completely covers a woman, with only a lattice grill over the face to permit some vision. In Pakistan the veil may be a filmy scarf drawn over the hair; in Saudi Arabia a flap of cloth is attached to a tight veil, so that only the eyes are visible. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries not only western feminists, but many national liberationists in Muslim countries, Kemal Attatürk in Turkey, for example, assumed that the emancipation of Muslim women must include unveiling. In the Soviet Union in the 1920s mass unveilings in the distant Asian republics sometimes resulted, after the Soviet cadres had departed, in death for the women who had thus dishonoured themselves and their families. In the 1960s and early 1970s, on the other hand, the then regime in Afghanistan encouraged women to unveil. In 1979 the veil or chador gained a much higher global profile as a result of the Iranian revolution. It was willingly adopted by many young, militant women as a symbol of their rejection of the corrupt regime of the Shah. Under the Shah's rule, a minority of bourgeois women had been emancipated, but this freedom for a privileged few was virtually meaningless to the mass of poor, uneducated women in the country. Moreover the corruption of the Shah's government and his government's relationship to the west led to revulsion from what was perceived as the wholesale decadence of western culture itself. Many Iranian women actively participated in the revolution. They were promised by its leaders that they would gain new rights and considerably more freedom, and anticipated that this would lead to an expansion of opportunities. However, once the Islamic Republic was established: the leaders of the revolution changed their attitude towards women and their position in the [new] society. Within a very short time ... new rules and regulations concerning all aspects of women's lives were announced. For example, there were restrictions on the type of jobs women could hold. Included in such restrictions was the imposition of compulsory hijab on women; it dictated how Muslim women should behave and set forth an ideal image for Muslim women represented by a particular style of hijab that is continuously promoted by the government.30 It should be noted that the chador or hijab in Iran is a modern, urban, not a traditional phenomenon, since peasant women could never have worked in the fields when fully covered in this way. Since 1979 the struggle in Iran to impose the veil and the system of morality it symbolises has been continuous. Yet there have still been stylistic differences and changes in style, since two types of public dress have evolved. The orthodox style, consisting of a floor length black covering with a separate headpiece, the maghnae, resembles the habit formerly worn by Roman Catholic and Anglican nuns. A second, more westernised style, incorporating European details such as gathers, slits, buttons and other decorations, is combined with a patterned headscarf. Women may use the modified form of hijab, along with make-up, to signal their political distance from the regime, but still risk the intrusive interest of the chastity police.³1 (One of the odder results of Iranian dress rules was the football match, during the qualifying rounds of the World Cup, between Iran and Ireland. Iranian women are forbidden to attend football matches, but a compromise for the Irish women supporters permitted them to attend the match, provided they covered themselves. They turned up in large numbers, clad in green veils, to brave the hostility of the indigenous fans.) In Palestine and Turkey, by contrast, some women have re-veiled as an expression of anti-western sentiment. In Turkey at least, however, Islamists, no less than secularists have, since the 1980s, been catered to by the rapid expansion of businesses that specialise in clothing and other articles for believers. Yael Navaro-Yashin has shown that Islamist, no less than secularist women in Turkey, followed fashion in their own way. Young Islamist women sought fashionable, expensive coats³2 and, rejecting the dark colours favoured by the strictest believers, favoured light pink and lavender, all the shades of purple, pastel blue and green, shady yellow and grey. Students carefully matched the colour of their türbans³³ ... to that of their overcoats, in the fashion that they took on to the streets at that time’ (the mid 1990s).34 Yael Navaro-Yashin relates such trends to the commodisation of identities, both secular and Islamist, in contemporary Turkey, and demonstrates that while claiming to represent ‘authenticity’and ‘tradition’ contemporary Islamist fashions are the product of the new Turkish capitalism. The avowed aim of one of Turkey's most successful Islamist clothing manufacturers (who has now expanded into Germany, the Netherlands and other European countries with large Turkish populations), was to provide Islamic clothing for women that would make them look pretty, so that they would prefer his models to western fashions. Thus the reappearance of the veil, in new forms, cannot be separated from capitalist development and urbanisation. The paradoxical result has been the incorporation of covered dress into the fashion system, rather than a distancing from it. An Islamist movement also developed in Egypt in the 1970s, spearheaded by women students and radicals. There the government attempted to prevent women from veiling, but without success. In the 1970s the young female militants of the New Islam had to make their own Islamic dress, since it did not exist commercially It consisted of: an unfitted, long-sleeved, ankle-length gown in austere solid colours and thick opaque fabric ... and a headcover that covers the hair and extends low to the forehead, comes under the chin to conceal the neck and falls down over the chest and back. The common colours used by women during the first decade of the movement were beige, brown, navy, deep wine, white and black. This dress is worn while engaging fully in worldly affairs in public social space in which not only is her gender accepted, but also her sexuality. Austere dress form and behaviour are therefore not accompanied by withdrawal, seclusion or segregation.'35 For educated young Malay women in Singapore and Malaysia, where many different kinds of head covering are worn, and are often combined with western clothes such as jeans, the veil again has a radical significance.36 The veil here sometimes has class connotations – to symbolise membership of an educated, middle class elite – and to signify for its wearers an identity that combines professional life and work with the modesty and reticence of Islamic beliefs. A student from this part of the world told me that for her the veil was a symbol of liberation rather than oppression. In a global world in which ‘the media plays a harmful role in trying to dictate the person we should be through our dress, how we look, our lifestyle etc., Islam opposes this. A woman is not seen or judged by her beauty, wealth or privileges but by her personality, character and good deeds. Young Muslim women are reclaiming the veil – to give back to women ultimate control of their own bodies.' In metropolitan France the hijab, here referring simply to a headscarf, became a highly politicised object when worn by Muslim schoolgirls. State education in France is secular in a country in which church and state were completely separated at the time of the French Revolution. Here again, as everywhere, the headscarf has become much more than a garment, it has become a highly symbolic statement, an over-determined object, with entirely different and indeed conflicting meanings to different groups. Some saw it as an attack on secularism, some as a fundamentalist statement, many as the symbol of the oppression of women. Those who objected to it were seen as racist and xenophobic, or, conversely, as defending secular liberal values and female equality. For some Muslim women in France the hijab appeared to become primarily a statement of ethno-religious identity rather than an expression of purely religious belief, since, for example, girls in the hijab were observed smoking, which is against Islamic principles. One woman was even photographed wearing a hijab with a bikini.37 The French debate exposes the difficulties for liberal westerners of achieving a coherent and adequate position on the issue of the veil. The researcher, Malcolm Brown believed that the hijab: should be permitted [in state schools] because a ban would have the effect of fulfilling, in part, the agenda of the extreme right in France. On the other hand, Muslim organisations should consider the Qur'anic ... context in more depth, and emphasise that Muslim women and girls should not be forced to wear the hijab, nor ... feel obliged to wear it. Freedom of conscience should be recognised.38 He concedes, however, that the emphasis on choice is itself an individualised western view. Fadwa El Guindi, rather inconsistently, emphasises choice to defend the Egyptian veiling practices referred to above. Hers is a disingenuous argument, for choice is surely not the point for religiously committed individuals. Rather it is obedience to a higher law. Moreover, choice, the mantra of western consumer society, cannot be the highest moral principle at the end of the day, and testifies rather to an emptiness at the heart of capitalist culture. It could be argued that there is no need for non Muslims to have any view at all on the various forms of veiling practiced throughout the world, that it is none of our business. Yet, when these traditions impinge on our own, different ones, we are bound to have a view of some kind; and since the practice of veiling is often defended as a critique of western ‘decadence’ it is relevant for us to discuss it. Muslims have rightly objected to the way in which the west has attacked Islamic customs, often in an ignorant and racist way. Western women have a corresponding right to expect that Muslims should not stereotype our forms of dress and behaviour as evidence merely ofdecadence’ and promiscuity. Many western feminists would endorse the Islamic criticism of western women's dress as frequently vulgarly titillating. In the past two years there has been much journalistic criticism of the exiguous attire adopted by various female stars and celebrities, as I suggested earlier, and of the ladette' culture in general. Is it really so emancipated for women to get drunk, smoke, swear and fornicate in imitation of football hooligans? Feminists can also only agree with Muslim women who point to the lack of equality for women in the west, the high rates of domestic violence, the sexual and economic exploitation. Yet there remain valid arguments against the belief that veiling, in whatever form, constitutes an answer either to these decadent aspects of capitalist society, or to the domination of men worldwide. Firstly, in covering herself a woman endorses the view that it is her responsibility to guard men from temptation. The view that it is women's role to guard morality and to save men from themselves' is not unknown in the west either. Yet this infantilises men. Adults of both sexes should take responsibility for their own behaviour and men as well as women should exercise self control (which indeed Islam does enjoin). As one Muslim schoolgirl in France asked a visiting Imam, who had explained that the hijab guarded men from sexual temptation, why since she found boys attractive, didn't men have to be veiled as well in order to protect her from temptation?39 This difference in the treatment of men and women within Islam reflects a view (not confined to Islam⁴0) that men and women are essentially different from each other and that sexual roles should and must reflect this difference. This contrasts with at least some forms of western feminism, which insist that women have an active and spontaneous sexual desire – it is not simply a response to men's desire. Secondly, it is not necessarily the case that if the body is seen as precious and if human beauty is to be cherished, it follows that it should be hidden in public. In ancient Greece the naked human body was glorified. Their tradition of celebrating the skill of the human body in sports and dancing is with us today, and women's full participation, which is to be welcomed, would be impossible were they veiled. Thirdly, one might further argue that the danger of hiding the body is that it then becomes obscene' (ie that which should not be seen): dirty and dangerous. The obtrusive gaze, instead of being deflected, may become more prurient in the face of what was intended to deter. Finally, the use only of dull materials in drab colours, enjoined by the more puritanical forms of Islam, seems a depressing approach to the public sphere. Again, however, the puritanical suspicion of beauty has been equally characteristic of Christian Puritanism, notably in the seventeenth century American feminist Kate Millett was clearly foolish when in 1979 she noisily lectured Iranian women and told them not to adopt the chador. In 2001, learning nothing from history, Laura Bush and Cherie Blair rushed into the fray during the war in Afghanistan, denouncing the burqah and its enforcement. Undoubtedly the burqah, traditionally worn by some groups, but not others, in Afghanistan, was imposed on many Afghan women and undoubtedly there were appalling human rights abuses against women (and men) in Afghanistan both during the Taliban regime and before – and, it is feared, after as well. Yet, the issues are far more complex than that, and as I hope I have demonstrated, there is no way in which ‘the veil’ can straightforwardly equate with women's oppression. Rather than attacking the practices of veiling, it would be more constructive for western secularists to achieve more consistency in their own social practices in regard to women, yet also to defend women's right to wear what they like, not in terms of individual ‘choice', but as a mark of female autonomy and emancipation from patriarchal control. A large part of the confusion over the veil is, as many Muslims have pointed out, that religious regulations have become fatally entwined in many Islamic communities with authoritarian and patriarchalist practices that have nothing to do with religion. On the other hand, the Afghan leader (male) who dismissed western concerns by saying the veil is a trivial and unimportant issue when compared with the need for water, education and the rebuilding of his country, overlooked the huge symbolic importance of dress. Dress is tremendously important, both in the micro-politics of the office and the street, and – as in Afghanistan – on the world political stage, because it ventriloquises urgent and sometimes insoluble political problems. Thus to argue about or seek to legislate or criticise the veil is a displacement, and at the same time an expression, of the pressing issue of how different belief systems are to coexist in the contemporary world and of the unresolved disagreements as to the status of women. This is paradoxical when dress and fashion are widely dismissed as so trivial and superficial – the dismissal itself a form of disavowal. It is not as if the fashion industry were unimportant economically. The mass production of clothing was part of what kick-started the industrial revolution. Beverley Lemire has traced its growth from 1660 to 1800, arguing that the trade was transformed through the impetus of military expansion’. Clothing in industrial quantities was needed for the expanding military and naval forces prosecuting the wars of the late seventeenth and the eighteenth century. The trade was further boosted by colonialism. In addition, institutions such as charity school, workhouses and foundling hospitals and orphanages always needed cheap garments for their charges, as, later, did prisons. So alongside the artisanal aristocracy of bespoke tailors, dressmakers and milliners making fashionable clothing for an exclusive clientele there coexisted an invisible’ trade, in large part composed of women: the largely female urban workforce furnished the productive impetus for the growth and continuing expansion of the industry; the products of their labour brought new commodities before the ... consumer'.41 Fashion was at the forefront: popular consumerism swept through England during the early modern period, centring first on appropriate apparel. Clothing in a wider breadth of fabrics and fashions was increasingly the article of choice among ... classes well below the social median.'42 Then, and ever since, the sweated labour of poorly paid women has underpinned the trade. Ever since, too, the clothing industry has continued to develop in several distinct and separate ways, with a fragmented labour force and backward technology in some areas. Ellen Leopold suggests that there has been no major technical innovation since the arrival of the sewing machine, and the Fordist assembly line was never fully established.43 Today these conditions have been globalised, with ‘free market' capitalism continuing to seek the most favourable conditions for profit expansion, that is, the cheap vulnerable labour, often of women and children, worldwide, so, as Jo Entwistle says, ‘the industry is a shameful one' in this respect.44 There is another side to fashion: that it is also a culture industry. Today ‘many cultural intermediaries play a crucial part in defining fashion - fashion designers, journalists and magazine editors, fashion buyers and retailers ... In a world saturated with images, the image of a fashion house or label has to be carefully manufactured across a number of economic and cultural sites - advertising, marketing, magazines, shop design' in complex interaction.45 Haute couture and fashion designers play a central role in creating images of fashion, and even in the short time since the 1980s haute couture has continued to evolve. Today, ownership of the famous names of Parisian fashion design is in the hands of a few huge conglomerates: LVMH (Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessy) owns Dior (where John Galliano reigns), Givenchy, Christian Lacroix, Fendi, and a 20% stake in Gucci; Pinault Printemps Redoute owns the rest of Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent ready to wear. The two groups and their respective chief executives, Bernard Arnault and François Pinault, have long been bitter rivals and in 2000 the rivalry came to a head when Alexander McQueen, who was the Givenchy designer, defected to Gucci. The ownership by such vast international conglomerates of design houses that used to create clothes for a private clientele, but whose influence now spreads mainly through ready to wear diffusion collections and through the dissemination of images of outré designs during the collections – a kind of double strategy in itself – has revolutionised the role of haute couture. In one sense its role is diminished, diluted by the influence of mass culture – music, film, the counter culture – so that styles develop from the fusion of diverse sources rather than from the creative genius', the designer at the top. Innovation, it is argued, is as likely to come from the street' as from Paris. The successful popular fashion chains, such as in Britain, Top Shop, drink from the same source and at the same time as the top designers. Nadia Jones, director of design for the chain Oasis, says, I'll go down to Portobello Market [in London's Notting Hill] on a Friday and there's the Gucci design team, John Galliano, the French Connection Designers.'46 All alike seek inspiration from the same fabric fairs, colour and fashion forecasters and, of course, see the same films, listen to the same music and travel to the same destinations.47 At the same time there are other aspiring avant garde designers who still work in almost artisanal conditions, sometimes from their own kitchen or living room. Angela McRobbie has described the difficulties faced by recent graduates from the prestigious Central St Martins school of fashion (alma mater of Galliano, Alexander McQueen, Hussein Chalayan and Antonio Berardi). Struggling to make ends meet with little support from the British government, they were likely to be forced to work abroad, design less cuttingedge clothes for a big mass market firm, or go out of business altogether.48 Caroline Evans described the work of one such designer, Shelley Fox, who has managed to continue to produce avant garde designs and to consolidate her business. This is a detailed case study of one woman's success in managing the convergence of artisanal methods, art and the exigencies of finance.49 That such individualised practices still exist illustrates the diversity of the fashion industry. Fashion is produced, marketed and consumed today in patterns that defy the traditional image of the industry as a pyramid with haute couture at the apex and new styles trickling down' towards the wide base of mass production. This model, influentially theorised by Georg Simmel,50 was always an over-simplification. New patterns of consumption were already developing in the seventeenth century and fashion innovators were not necessarily the royal courts and the aristocracy. Fashion,' writes Beverly Lemire, was never a uni-polar phenomenon arising from the court and the West End salons and sweeping in dilute forms through the lower ranks. Its effects were always dynamic, moving in both directions across social boundaries.’ She cites the simplification of the dress of young aristocrats in England in the 1730s. Critics were dismayed by this adaptation of what they saw as labourers’ costume, yet by the end of the century it had become the norm.51 So today, haute couture is in some ways less dominant than it used to be. The collection shows themselves run at a loss, as elaborate advertisements for ready to wear and all the franchises of cosmetics, scent and accessories. The shows are a twice yearly spectacle, another ‘tournament of value', and appear closer to performance art than to mere displays of the latest designs. Yet alongside these changes, haute couture has moved closer to the art world as its fashion leadership has waned. In the 1980s Diana Vreeland, former editor of American Vogue and American Harper's Bazaar, found a new role in creating and curating a series of fashion exhibitions at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. The first, in 1980, was an exhibition of traditional Chinese dress, and later shows included one devoted to the work of Yves Saint Laurent and another to Ralph Lauren. Some were critical of this development, seeing the exhibitions as an expression of the worst aspects of conspicuous consumption in the Reagan era. The initial, Chinese exhibition, for example, showed little deep understanding of ancient Chinese culture. The galleries were drenched in 'Opium' scent and an aura of orientalism. The fact that the precious robes had originally been intended not for public display but for private worship was ignored. Diana Vreeland ‘had mixed and matched Chinese raiment indiscriminately. Never would a Chinese wife or courtesan of the Emperor have worn an “outfit” like those created by Diana Vreeland ... the mannequins displayed the “layered look" of 1970s fashion designers rather than the style of any Chinese historical period.'52 Yet whatever their shortcomings, these exhibitions made a claim for fashion as an art, as a serious aesthetic medium worthy of display in the museum, and for contemporary as well as historical dress as worthy of critical attention. Since the 1980s museums such as the Victoria and Albert Museum in London and the Guggenheim in New York have staged a number of successful shows, but there have always been critics who refuse to accept that fashion should invade the museum and the art gallery. The reaction of one critic to the – admittedly uninspiring – Guggenheim Giorgio Armani exhibition in 2000 was of unrestrained horror: the main galleries at the Guggenheim, once home to 20th century painting, are the latest franchise in the Giorgio Armani chain,’ wrote Michael Ellison, in the London Guardian, and quoted Hilton Kramer, art critic of the New York Times. ‘The Guggenheim,' thundered Kramer, 'has no aesthetic standards and no aesthetic agenda. It has completely sold out to a mass-market mentality that regards the museum's own art collection as an asset to be exploited for commercial purposes.’ For Ellison, however, it seemed to be not only the fact that Armani had allegedly donated \$15 million to the gallery that upset him, but the simplicity of the clothes themselves, and the fact that they had all belonged to film stars and been worn in films. When you've seen one suit, you've seen them all,’ he complained and objected to the admittedly pretentious prose used to describe an outfit worn by Richard Gere in American Gigolo: "the seductive elegance of the anti-hero's clothing became legend," are the words chosen to explain the significance of a crumpled jacket.'53 Architecture critic Deyan Sudjic was equally scornful of fashion's pretensions on the occasion of the 2001Radical Fashion' exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum: Fashion is parasitic. It depends on other art forms for its imagery and its identity. And it's been so successful at it that it has begun to replace them... fashion is the perfect cultural form for the severely limited attention spans of our times and it is expanding to fill a vacuum left by the shrivelling of interest in older art forms. Fashion suits our restricted tastes.'54 He further deplored the move whereby Prada had commissioned architects Rem Koolhaas and Jacques Herzog to design new stores in New York and Japan, while Frank Gehry designed a boutique for Issey Miyake in New York's Tribeca. Taking a very different view of haute couture, Caroline Evans has analysed the radical experiments of some of the designers whose work featured at the Victoria and Albert show, and has more generally investigated the long-standing relationship between fashion and art. She has described how in the 1930s Elsa Schiaparelli, whose designs engaged seriously with Surrealism, used fashion to question the place of women in the society of the time and, with her use of mirrors, masquerade and trompe l’oeil, the relationship of garment to body and feminine identity to performance.55 In a second article she defended Alexander McQueen's controversial fashion spectacles, in which the models appeared bloodstained, staggering, covered in mud, pinioned by cruel jewellery and headgear. In March 1995, for example, his fifth show, entitled Highland $R a p e ,$ ‘mixed military jackets with McQueen tartan and moss wool, contrasting tailored jackets with torn and brutally ravaged lace dresses and ripped skirts. On a runway strewn with heather and bracken McQueen's staggering and blood-spattered models appeared wild and distraught, their breasts and bottoms exposed by tattered laces and torn suedes, jackets with missing sleeves, and skin-tight rubber trousers and skirts cut so low at the hip they seemed to defy gravity.'56 McQueen was often accused of misogyny, but Evans accepts his explanation that Highland Rape was about the eighteenth century genocide of the Scots by the English, and resonated with the genocide in Rwanda and atrocities in Bosnia at this period. Far from exploiting violence towards women, his shows raised the issue. ‘The cruelty inherent in McQueen's representations of women was part of the designer's wider vision of the cruelty of the world, and although his view was undoubtedly a bleak one it was not, I would argue ... misogynist.'57 Evans explored the way in which in his March 1996 Dante collection McQueen referenced the nineteenth century femme fatale, using a ‘mourning palette' and models made up with blood red lips and vampiric white faces. The nineteenth-century femme fatale was ... a fearful representation ... [of] female sexuality as perverse, even deathly.' The fin de siècle produced images of women whose sexuality was toxic, a theme that returned in the 1980s when sex and death were again linked through HIV and AIDs. McQueen's designs worn by glamorous but alarming models produced ‘an image tinged equally with desire and dread’. These were women whose appearance was so threatening that it constituted a shield. Rather than appearing vulnerable they produced an image of sexuality as terror.58 Evans pondered on the paradox that radical ideas she traced back to de Sade, Jean Genet and Georges Bataille should at the end of the twentieth century find expression in fashion design. For her, McQueen's work made a serious political point at a moment of cultural trauma. Rather than capitulating to the facile assumption that a preoccupation with fashion necessarily equates with triviality, she makes the deeper point that in a period obsessed with image, style and the superficial, these means can be subverted to express radical political views and to mount a critique of the ephemera they simultaneously create.59 An exhibition by Martin Margiela in 1997 brought fashion even closer to art. Margiela is known for using recycled clothing in many of his designs. For this exhibition he took a series of garments from his previous collections and had them treated with fungus, mould and/or bacteria. During the course of the exhibition these grew and thereby changed the appearance of the garments. For example, for one design he had originally taken two 1940s tea gowns apart and created a single ‘new’ dress from one half of each of the old garments. Now they reappeared, their already dissonant patterns of rose prints juxtaposed with gauze and net overlaid by a pattern of yellow bacteria, a false patina of age grown in a few days on fiftyyear-old dresses.'60 In so treating them, Margiela referred, Evans argued, to the whole history of secondhand clothes markets, the nineteenth century ragpickers and the way in which clothes are imbricated with memory, redolent of the past but inhabited by bodies – identities even – that change over time.61 This blurring of the boundary between art and fashion provides a convenient point at which to turn to a discussion of some of the developments in fashion theory and fashion studies since the 1980s.62 The disdainful comments of Sudjic and his fellow critics reflect a traditional view: that fashion is defined by it being not-art, and that because it deals with surfaces and with self adornment it is a direct manifestation of superficiality and vanity. Adorned in Dreams and all serious books about fashion seem invariably to need to return to first principles and argue anew for the importance of dress, yet whereas anthropologists always recognised that the dress – both the actual garments and the sartorial rules – of other societies provided an indispensable key to a culture, it has been and still is difficult for serious minded men and women in the west (although less so in some countries than in others) to acknowledge that clothes are ‘unspeakably meaningful’. Lou Taylor has argued that because dress and fashion are themselves despised, costume history has also always been marginalised. A strong tradition of empirical costume history grew up in Britain, initially as an offshoot of art history. This was an approach that placed actual garments and textiles at its centre, and was as likely to be based in the museum as in the university. Yet historically museums were run largely by men who adopted a hostile attitude to the collection and display of European fashionable dress. In the Anglophone world this began slowly to change only in the 1950s when professional women curators began to be appointed. The prejudice against fashionable dress is therefore highly gendered: Object based research focuses necessarily and unapologetically on examination of the details of clothing and fabric. This process depends upon a series of patiently acquired, specialised skills ... skills that have been underrated by many economic, social and cultural historians. Curators and conservators become expert at professional specialist care over cleaning, repairing, washing, pressing, storing and displaying clothing. These are skills that society at large still considers very feminine domestic occupations – almost .. like doing the laundry.63 As she notes, over the past fifteen years the field has been transformed through the intervention of academics from fields such as cultural studies, social and economic history and cultural theory, Adorned in Dreams being an early example. The garment as object' approach, starting from close examination of textiles, cut, provenance and so on, may to some appear limited by its descriptive protocols, but its attention to detail provides the possibility of drawing important conclusions concerning the reasons, for example, for changes in fashion. Lou Taylor gave a vivid account of this process in an article in which she showed that the careful examination of textiles and archival material could not only demonstrate that change took place, but could explain it in socio-cultural terms that challenged previously accepted explanations: a process of feminisation of male wool cloth took place over the 1865- 1885 period as a result of consumer demand by well-off women for more practical tailored dress. This indicates that the dress reform movement, which reached a peak of activity in Britain in the 1883–1900 period, built upon, rather than [creating, as previously assumed] the success of already established tailored styles. The sartorial radicalism within the movement lay therefore not in the use of heavier weight wool cloth [because the cloth had already been modified] but rather in its campaigns for ever more rationalism in tailored styles.’64 At a conference in Manchester in 1998 at which methodological issues were thrashed out, Lou Taylor argued that the initial impact of cultural studies approaches to dress in the 1980s was ‘divisive’, but that in recent years a new, creative interdisciplinary approach has developed. In 1985 I ended my theoretical Chapter 3 of Adorned in Dreams by pointing out that cultural theorists, paradoxically, were almost exclusively interested in masculine subcultural styles and that feminism had had little to say about fashion – and still less that was positive. Much has changed since then, with the development of a strong feminist presence in cultural studies and a much enhanced recognition of the importance of mass culture. In parallel, the myth of the ‘great masculine renunciation’ of fashion has been demolished by a new generation of researchers,65 and exposed simply as a massive form of ‘masculine disavowal.66 Chris Breward, also speaking at Manchester, agreed with Lou Taylor that cultural studies and dress history had much to offer each other, and eloquently defended what has come to be seen as the ‘cultural studies approach'. However, he reminded his audience that the cultural studies field is itself not unified, although ‘the deconstruction of image or product as text lies at the heart of any totalising definition of a cultural studies methodology’.67 The study of fashion by cultural theorists has indeed tended to dwell on fashion images and their symbolic and communicative power. An example is the work of Alexandra Warwick and Dani Cavallaro, literary theorists who, in Fashioning the Frame, were concerned with dress as it demarcates body boundaries. For them, ‘dress foregrounds the difficulty of establishing the body's boundaries’ and constitutes an uncertain frame. Its ambivalence is further emphasised by the coexistence, within its discourse, of disciplinary, regulatory strategies and subversive potentialities ... Dress represents the body as a fundamentally liminal phenomenon by stressing its precarious location on the threshold between the physical and the abstract, the literal and the metaphorical.'68 They used the theories of Michel Foucault and the psycho-analysts Jacques Lacan and Julia Kristeva to explore the ambivalence they have identified, convinced that psychoanalysis can explain the arbitrariness’ of the fashion system. Rejecting earlier, rather crude explanations of fashion as functional for capitalism and patriarchy, and followers of fashion as brainwashed victims of an exploitative system, psychoanalysis: ‘suggests ways in which capitalism or patriarchy can actually co-opt the psyche in their operations, and why the seductions of fashion are so difficult to resist'. To follow fashion is to participate in a complex process of self-determination. Items of clothing are objects of desire that hold the promise of completion, the last piece necessary to close the gap; but because they are inherently condemned to failure, the subject's desire turns to another piece, a new object to fulfil that desire.'69 Julia Kristeva contrasted the ‘symbolic' – in which there is a clear demarcation between self and other – with the ‘semiotic' – which ‘is inimical to inviolable boundaries'. In poetic discourse the semiotic becomes “a new language ... defined in opposition to traditional language".70 This is an instinctive language, dependent on rhythm rather than logic. For Warwick and Cavallaro the language of dress is like Kristeva's poetic language. Their literary and philosophic arguments illuminate some of the many ambiguities of dress and grant an insight into the melancholy dissatisfaction that so often accompanies the desire to achieve a desirable, a fashionable appearance' (in itself an evocative and suggestive word) In The Study of Dress History, Lou Taylor vividly communicated the thrill of discovering lost objects of desire: Every dress curator/ collector has their own story of triumph and disaster connected to finding special items of dress, such as a rare length of 1920s Lyons art deco fashion fabric, possibly by Maison Ducharne, found by the author in the 50p scarf bin at an Age Concern [thrift] shop in Midhurst, East Sussex."71 She went on to describe a number of major finds' of collections of clothing, and also the careless way in which many priceless garments have been lost, simply because they were not considered worth saving – another example of the undervaluation of dress. Yet complementary though the ‘garment as object' and the ‘cultural studies' approaches are, their goals are not necessarily identical. The preoccupation of Warwick and Cavallaro with image and sign is with the excavation of meaning, usually contemporary, whereas the object-based approach is more usually concerned with the excavation of the past. This is in itself an important difference, and may have exacerbated some of the misunderstandings that have dogged the field. One of the strengths of an approach such as Taylor's is in its aim to reconstruct past usages: how consumers acquired, made, modified and generally used their clothes, yet she is perhaps too critical of any work that does not include at least some discussion of garments as objects. For example, she assumes that Malcolm Barnard in his useful survey, Fashion as Communication,72 omits any such discussion out of hostility’ to the approach, yet there is no evidence that Barnard disliked or dismissed work on garments as objects, rather it may have seemed to him that it was not relevant to his specific aim. It is true that research that is not object-based may lead authors to generalisation or even to the introduction of ‘errors about the actual clothing'.73 As Naomi Tarrant tartly put it, ‘Clothing studies are contorted to fit some theory without a basic understanding of the properties of cloth and the structure of clothes. A little knowledge of weaving and dressmaking might have made some of these works more relevant to clothing studies.'74 On the other hand, it is difficult to see how the discussion of any specific garment and its making would radically modify the ideas of Warwick and Cavallaro, since they are not really concerned with how clothes feel on our bodies, but rather with mental and psychological appropriations. Certainly Mrs Korner's ensembles, mentioned earlier, constructed a different body from today's track suit – or today's suit, for that matter – and the making of those garments is crucial to the experience of wearing them, but Warwick and Cavallaro explore a more obscure realm of unconscious desires. It is important, therefore, that the new interdisciplinary dress history should recognise that differences in approach represent in part differences in the questions being asked and should observe a mutual respect for these differences within a fruitfully crossfertilising field. One difference may have seemed to be that costume historians have felt that cultural theorists have “invested very heavily in words", so that “the sensory aspect of the past is not always recognised as worthy of attention".75 This misrepresents cultural studies, but since researchers in this field focus on the contemporary rather than the past, it is hardly surprising if they focus on the sensuousness of image rather than object because the contemporary world is so saturated with images. The field of interest that brings costume historians and cultural critics together is not, actually, a single field; or rather, it consists of overlapping areas of study.76 The production and consumption of clothes has changed vastly over time and that change accelerated in the second half of the twentieth century. Individual items of clothing have become less and less costly, relatively speaking, although the mass production of clothing is not new, as we saw. Therefore, the costume historian who researches, say, eighteenthcentury European court dress, is engaging with objects of great value both at the time - as major items of economic outlay burdened also with a significant weight of aesthetic and sociocultural value – and also as irreplaceable antique objects that have survived and, in so doing, lived an important ‘social biography'.77 Today, by contrast, a trip to any ‘nearly new' boutique will demonstrate that even designer outfits get discarded by their original consumers after a rather short period of time, while the fashion commentator or cultural theorist primarily interested in contemporary items of dress such as those that litter the floor of my daughter's bedroom – camisole vests, high street jeans, H & M skirts and leather jackets bought at street markets – is engaging with garments whose life is so brief that they will scarcely achieve any kind of social biography' at all. Like butterflies that live but for a single day, their brief journey through life from garment rail to jumble sale hardly allows for the detailed analysis appropriate for valuable historical items. The two approaches, however, are not mutually exclusive and Lou Taylor's optimism for the future bears repeating: dress history/dress studies is being propelled into its new future by the high levels of interdisciplinary good practice emerging from both sides of the great dress history divide."78 Fools rush in where angels fear to tread, and I admit to being blissfully unaware of this 'great divide' when I wrote Adorned in Dreams. In a period of rapid change, academically and intellectually, with emerging new disciplines and increasing interdisciplinarity, boundary disputes and territorial claims are bound to occur. What is more important, since prejudice against new subjects as opposed to traditional ones still exists, is the defence of dress studies per se. The conclusion to a book on fashion presents a problem, because the question most likely to be asked is: what next? or what now? There are few things more irritating than being rung up by some rookie journalist and asked for an instant analysis of the ‘meaning’ of the latest passing fashion, as though one could read off a portentous social message from every tweak to trouser width or hem length. For this very reason it is hard to bring a fashion book to an end: the next style is always hovering in the wings, while the very arbitrariness of the next latest thing – inviting yet refusing a plausible explanation – defeats the sense of an ending. A distinguished costume historian recently complained of the fashion among dress scholars for citations from the work of Walter Benjamin, but I cannot resist a reference to his work. Only recently translated in English, and therefore now available to a much wider audience, his Arcades Project consists of thousands of notes and aphoristic comments. Aphorisms, as everyone knows, positively invite quotation, since their brevity produces a certain ambiguity and – sometimes – a verbal flourish standing in for a developed thought. Their very ambiguity, moreover, invites endless critical deconstruction. The aphorism seems especially well suited to the discussion of fashion, indeed, each passing fashion is itself an aphorism in material form (so perhaps after all the journalists are right in their search for instant meaning). The ‘Fashion' section in the Arcades Project is rich in ambiguous – and ambivalent – ideas and quotations, and Benjamin is ever mindful of the importance of the material object: the eternal is ... far more the ruffle on a dress than some idea,,79 he wrote, which would please Naomi Tarrant, notwithstanding that Benjamin has long been the darling of cultural theorists. In his fascination with objects, especially forgotten and disregarded ones, Benjamin found a kindred spirit in the Surrealists, who perceived the revolutionary energies that appear in the “outmoded", in the first iron constructions, the first factory buildings, the earliest photos, the objects that have begun to be extinct, grand pianos, the dresses of five years ago ..'80 Contemplation of the just démodé, he believed, potentially uproots us from the immediate present and has the potential to induce the Surrealists’profane illumination'.81 It disturbs a linear history, and is capable of revealing the relevance of the past for the present. In recycling styles, fashion rewrites history aesthetically, but not only that, since it opens the way to, and visually illuminates the possibility of a dialectical philosophy of history, in which ideas and concepts are pursued, rather than a chronological following of events’.82 Thus fashion, most marginalised of all arts, lives at the heart of history. As mute and humble material object it transforms itself into the embodiment of the most shocking, the most subversive ideas. Those, moreover, who despise it might as well denounce Freud for his scrupulous attention to the refuse of the phenomenal world' – dreams, jokes and slips of the tongue. For garments, like the detritus of the everyday, far from hiding, or distracting us from, life's important matters, expose the eternal in the ephemeral, and à society's most treasured beliefs. Victorian mourning dress expressed the relationship of that society to death; the Versace ‘trash aesthetic' our relationship to consumption and celebrity. To despise fashion as frivolous is therefore the most frivolous posture of all. ## References ## Chapter One 1. Dickens, Charles (1976), 'Meditations in Monmouth Street', in Selected Short Fiction, Harmondsworth: Penguin, Pp. 106-7. (Originally published in 1836.) 2. Polhemus, Ted (ed.) (1978), Introduction', Social Aspects of the Body, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 28. 3. Douglas, Mary (1966), Purity and Danger, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 4. Carlyle, Thomas (1931), Sartor Resartus, London: Curwen Press. (Originally published in 1831.) 5. Sévigné, Madame de (1982), Selected Letters, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 74. 6. Bell, Quentin (1947), On Human Finery, London: The Hogarth Press, p. 14. 7. Hollander, Anne (1975), Seeing Through Clothes, New York: Avon Books. 8. Jameson, Fredric (1981) The Political Unconscious: Narrative as Socially Symbolic Act, London: Methuen, p. 79. 9. Moretti, Franco (1983), Homo Palpitans: Balzac's Novels and Urban Personality', Signs Taken for Wonders, London: Verso, p. 113. 10. Martin, Bernice (1981), A Sociology of Contemporary Cultural Change, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, p. 28. 11. Jameson, Fredric (1984), Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism', New Left Review, no. 146, July/August. 12. Elias, Norbert (1978), The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners, Vol. I, translated by Edmund Jephcott, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, p. 50. ## Chapter Two 1. Newton, Stella Mary (1976), 'Couture and Society', Times Literary Supplement, 12 November. 2. Hiler, Hilaire (1929), From Nudity to Raiment, London: Foyles. 3. Von Boehn, Max (1932), Modes and Manners, Vol. I: From the Decline of the Ancient World to the Renaissance, London: Harrap, p. 168. 4. Gibbon, Edward (1952), The Portable Gibbon: The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 204–5. 5. Runciman, Steven (1975), Byzantine Style and Civilization, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 121. 6. ibid., p. 123. 7. Laver, James (1969a), A Concise History of Costume, London: Thames and Hudson, p. 62. 8. ibid. 9. Mukerji, Chandra (1983), From Graven Images: Patterns of Modern Materialism, New York: Columbia University Press, ch. 5. My thanks to Hilda Scott for directing my attention to this book. 10. My thanks to Tony Halliday for this suggestion. I have relied on Laver, James, op. cit., for my account of Cretan costume. 11. Cunnington, Phillis and Lucas, Catherine (1967), Occupational Costume in England from the Eleventh Century to 1914, London: Adam and Charles Black. 12. ibid., p. 204. 13. Von Boehn, Max, op. cit. 14. Cunnington, Phillis and Lucas, Catherine, op. cit. 15. Baldwin, Frances Elizabeth (1926), Sumptuary Legislation and Personal Regulation in England, Baltimore: John Hopkins Press. 16. Burckhardt, Jacob (1955), The Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy, London; Phaidon Press, pp. 223–4. (Originally published in 1860.) 17. Quoted in Berman, Marshall (1983), All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, London: Verso. 18. ibid. 19. Laver, James (1969b), Modesty in Dress: An Inquiry into the Fundamentals of Fashion, London: Heinemann, p. 44. 20. Flugel, J. C. (1930), The Psychology of Clothes, London: Hogarth Press. 21. See Bray, Alan (1983), Homosexuality in Renaissance England, London: Gay Men's Press; and Weeks, Jeffrey (1977), Coming Out, London: Quartet. 22. Delbourg-Delphis, Marylène (1981), Le Chic et le Look: Histoire de la Mode Féminine et des Moeurs de 1850 à nos Jours, Paris: Hachette. 23. Quoted in Moers, Ellen (1960), The Dandy: Brummell to Beerbohm, London: Secker and Warburg. 24. Saunders, Edith (1954), The Age of Worth, London: Longmans, p. 75. 25. Banner, Lois (1983), American Beauty, New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 26. Benjamin, Walter (1973a), Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London: New Left Books, p. 47. 27. Cunnington, Phillis and Lucas, Catherine, op. cit. 28. Byron, George Gordon, Lord (1982), Selected Prose, letter to Francis Hodgson, 25 September 1811, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 95. 29. Charles-Roux, Edmonde (1975), Chanel, London: Jonathan Cape, translated by Nancy Amphoux. 30. Beaton, Cecil (1954), The Glass of Fashion, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 31. Etherington-Smith, Meredith (1983), Patou, London: Hutchinson. 32. Waugh, Evelyn (1928), Decline and Fall, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 75. 33. Lee, Sarah Tomalin (1975), American Fashion, London: André Deutsch, p. 218. 34. Chisholm, Anne (1981), Nancy Cunard, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 35. In Britain, clothing was rationed (on coupons') during the Second World War, and for several years afterwards. Each individual was issued with a book of coupons, which had to last for one year; most items of clothing were valued in coupons; hats, however, were exempt. ## Chapter Three 1. Newton, Stella Mary (1975), Fashions in Fashion History', Times Literary Supplement, 21 March, argues that fashion history lags behind other branches of art history, and is unlikely to catch up’. 2. Moore, Doris Langley (1949), The Woman in Fashion, London: Batsford. As it happens all the psychological enquiries into fashion are predominantly concerned with feminine fashion, and the band of theorists has without exception been male.’ (p. 1.) 3. Cunnington, Cecil Willett (1950), Women (Pleasures of Life Series), London: Burke. 4. Cunnington, Cecil Willett (1941), Why Women Wear Clothes London: Faber and Faber, pp. 260–61. 5. Bell, Quentin (1947), On Human Finery, London: The Hogarth Press, p. 128. 6. Moore, Doris Langley, op. cit. 7. Veblen, Thorstein (1957), The Theory of the Leisure Class, London: Allen and Unwin, pp. 179–82. (Originally published in 1899.) 8. Adorno, Theodor (1967), 'Veblen's Attack on Culture', Prisms, Cambridge, Ma.: The MIT Press; translated by Samuel and Sherry Weber, p. 77. 9. See Chapters Ten and Eleven. 10. Lasch, Christopher (1979), The Culture of Narcissism, New York: Warner Books. 11. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth (1982), Channels of Desire: Mass Images and the Shaping of the American Consciousness, New York: McGraw Hill. 12. Baudrillard, Jean (1981), For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, St Louis, Mo.: Telos Press, p. 79; translated by Charles Levin. 13. ibid., p. 51n. 14. Mukerji, Chandra (1983), From Graven Images: Patterns of Modern Materialism, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 2, 188. 15. Carlyle, Thomas (1931), Sartor Resartus, London: Curwen Press, p. 48. (Originally published in 1831.) 16. Darwin, Charles (1959), The Voyage of the Beagle, London: J. M. Dent and Sons, pp. 202–3, 210. (Originally published in 1845.) 17. Quoted in Laver, James (1969b), op. cit., p. 9. 18. Bell, Quentin, op. cit., p. 13. 19. Lurie, Alison (1981), The Language of Clothes, London: Heinemann. 20. Barthes, Roland (1967), Système de la Mode, Paris: Éditions du Seuil. 21. Culler, Jonathan (1975), Structuralist Poetics, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 22. Barthes, Roland, op. cit., p. 256. 23. König, René (1973), The Restless Image, London: George Allen and Unwin. 24. The quotation comes from The Communist Manifesto (1848), quoted in Berman, Marshall (1983), All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, London: Verso. 25. Mallarmé, Stéphane (1933), La Dernière Mode, with an introduction by S. A. Rhodes. New York: Publications of the Institute of French Studies, Inc. 26. Greenberg, Clement (1982), Modernist Painting', in Frascina, Frances and Harrison, Charles (eds.), Modern Art and Modernism: A Critical Anthology, London: Harper and Row. 27. Anderson, Perry (1984), 'Modernity and Revolution', New Left Review, no. 144, March/April. 28. Horkheimer, Max and Adorno, Theodor (1979), The Dialectic of Enlightenment, translated by John Cumming, London: Verso, p. 154. (Originally published in 1944.) ## Chapter Four 1. Thompson, E. P. (1968), The Making of the English Working Class, Harmondsworth: Penguin; Foster, John (1974), Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution, London: Methuen. 2. Fraser, Grace Lovat (1948), Textiles by Britain, London: Allen and Unwin, gives this derivation. Taylor, Lou (1983), Mourning Dress: A Costume and Social History, London: Allen and Unwin, states that the name jeans’ is supposed to derive from Jaen in Spain. 3. Mukerji, Chandra (1983), From Graven Images: Patterns of Modern Materialism, New York: Columbia University Press, ch. 5; Fraser, Grace Lovat, op. cit. 4. George, M. Dorothy (1966), London Life in the Eighteenth Century, Harmondsworth: Penguin. (Originally published in 1925.) 5. Taylor, Lou, op. cit., however, suggests that when, as frequently happened, whole courts were plunged into mourning, the general silk trade was severely affected and workers thrown out of employment. 6. Briscoe, Lynden (1971), The Textile and Clothing Industries of the U.K., Manchester: Manchester University Press. 7. Stewart, Margaret and Hunter, Leslie (1964), The Needle is Threaded: The History of an Industry, London: Heinemann. 8. Engels, Friedrich (1973), The Condition of the Working Class in England, Moscow: Progress Publishers, pp. 245–6. (Originally published in 1844.) 9. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth (1982), Channels of Desire: Mass Images and the Shaping of the American Consciousness, New York: McGraw Hill. 10. Taylor, Barbara (1983a), ““The Men are as Bad as their Masters . . .": Socialism, Feminism and Sexual Antagonism in the London Tailoring Trade of the 1830s', in Newton, Judith, Ryan, Mary P., and Walkowitz, Judith R. (1983), Sex and Class in Women's History, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, p. 206. 11. Alexander, Sally (1976), 'Women's Work in Nineteenth Century London: A Study of the Years 1820–1850', in Mitchell, Juliet and Oakley, Ann (1976), The Rights and Wrongs of Women, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 12. Black, Clementina (1983), Married Women's Work: Being the Report of an Enquiry Undertaken by the Women's Industrial Council, London: Virago, with an introduction by Ellen F. Mappen. (Originally published in 1915.) 13. Stewart, Margaret and Hunter, Leslie, op. cit., p. 128. 14. Chase, Edna Woolman (1954), Always in Vogue, London: Gollancz 15. Black, Clementina, op. cit. 16. Bennett, Arnold (Jacob Tonson) (1917), Books and Persons, quoted in Gross, John (1969), The Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters: Aspects of English Literary Life Since 1800, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 17. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth, op. cit., pp. 210–11. 18. Dobbs, J. L. (1928), The Clothing Workers of Great Britain, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 19. Disher, M. L. (1947), American Factory Production of Women's Clothing, London: Deveraux Publications, p. 5. See also Dooley, William H. (1934), Economics of Clothing and Textiles, Boston: DC Heath. 20. Ewing, Elizabeth (1974), History of Twentieth Century Fashion, London: Batsford. 21. ibid., p. 202. 22. Briscoe, Lynden, op. cit., p. 176. 23. National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers (NUTGW). I am most grateful to Neil Kearney, Information and Research Officer of NUTGW, for giving me his time and so much helpful information. 24. Campbell, Beatrix (1979), 'Lining Their Pockets', Time Out, 13–19 July. 25. Coyle, Angela (1982), ‘Sex and Skill in the Organization of the Clothing Industry', in West, Jackie (ed.), Work, Women and the Labour Market, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, p. 11. 26. Hamilton, M. (1951), Women at Work, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, p. 130. 27. Briscoe, Lynden, op. cit. Modernization and the installation of increasingly complex automatic machinery led to the employment of skilled engineers (male), particularly in the hosiery and knitted goods sector. Investment in capital intensive plant meant that shift work was increasingly introduced (to recoup and reap the profits) and male immigrant labour replaced women workers. 28. See Chapkis, Wendy and Enloe, Cynthia (1983), OfCommon Cloth: Women in the Global Textile Industry, Amsterdam: Transnational Institute. These authors, however, discuss import controls only as an isolated form of protectionism, not as part of an overall Alternative Economic Strategy’ that would include new trading initiatives with developing and socialist countries. 29. NUTGW. 30. Elson, Diane and Pearson, Ruth (1981), "“Nimble Fingers Make Cheap Workers": An Analysis of Women's Employment in Third World Export Manufacturing', Feminist Review, no. 7, Spring. 31. NUTGW. 32. Chapkis, Wendy and Enloe, Cynthia, op. cit. 33. Poiret, Paul (1931), My First Fifty Years, London: Gollancz. 34. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth, op. cit. 35. Dior, Christian (1957), Dior by Dior, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 36. ibid., p. 17. 37. Bertin, Célia (1956), Paris à la Mode: A Voyage of Discovery, London: Gollancz. 38. See Suzy Menkes in The Times, 5 July 1983, and Nathalie Mont-Servan in Le Monde, 26 May 1984. ## Chapter Five 1. Laver, James (1969b), Modesty in Dress: An Inquiry into the Fundamentals ofFashion, London: Heinemann. 2. Flugel, J. C. (1930), The Psychology of Clothes, London: Hogarth Press. 3. In psychoanalytic terms, a reaction formation is a defence mechanism. Forbidden wishes and fantasies are denied; the reaction formation is the development of strong feelings against what was previously desired. For example, homophobia is, according to psychoanalytic thought, a reaction formation against homosexual wishes that have become unconscious. 4. Bergler, Edmund (1953), Fashion and the Unconscious, New York: Robert Brunner. 5. ibid., p. 289. 6. Baudrillard, Jean (1981), For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, St Louis, Mo.: Telos Press, p. 91. 7. Freud, Sigmund (1953), Three Essays on The Theory of Sexuality', The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works, Vol. VII (1953), London: The Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psychoanalysis. Translated by James Strachey. (Originally published in 1905.) 8. Morris, Ivan (1964), The World of the Shining Prince, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 216. 9. Flaubert, Gustave (1972), Madame Bovary, Paris: Livre de Poche, p. 20. (Originally published in 1857.) 10. ibid., p. 186. 11. Tanner, Tony (1979), Adultery and the Novel, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 12. Laver, James, op. cit., p. 115. 13. Kunzle, David (1982), Fashion and Fetishism, Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield. 14. Roberts, Hélène (1977), The Exquisite Slave: The Role of Clothes in the Making of the Victorian Woman', Signs, Vol. 2, no. 3, Spring, p. 557. 15. Tinling, Teddy (1983), Sixty Years in Tennis, London: Sidgwick and Jackson, p. 24. 16. Faust, Beatrice (1981), Women, Sex and Pornography, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 49. Thanks to Ruby Rich for drawing my attention to this passage. 17. See Chapter Eleven. 18. Réage, Pauline (1954), The Story of O, London: The Olympia Press, pp. 16, 60, 61–2, 62. 19. Cunnington, C. Willett and Cunnington, Phillis (1951), The History of Underclothes, London: Michael Joseph, p. 11. 20. Duff Gordon, Lucy, Lady (1932), Discretions and Indiscretions, London: Jarrolds, p. 45. 21. Wharton, Edith (1952), The House of Mirth, London: Oxford University Press, pp. 298-302. (Originally published in 1905.) 22. Laver, James, op. cit., pp. 110–11. 23. Ewing, Elizabeth (1978), Dress and Undress: A History of Women's Underwear, London: Batsford, p. 173. 24. Carter, Angela (1982), The Bridled Sweeties', Nothing Sacred, London: Virago. 25. See Kolbowski, Silvia (1984), (Di)vested Interests: The Calvin Klein Ads', ZG, no. 10, Spring. 26. Cunnington, Cecil Willett and Cunnington, Phillis, op. cit., p. 12. 27. Angeloglou, Maggie (1970), A History of Makeup, London: Studio Vista. 28. Dickens, Charles (1970), Dombey and Son, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 472. (Originally published in 1848.) 29. Banner, Lois (1983), American Beauty, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, p. 42. 30. Rubinstein, Helena (1930), The Art of Feminine Beauty, London: Gollancz. 31. Anderson, Jervis (1982), Harlem: The Great Black Way 1900–1950, London: Orbis. 32. Lewis, Alfred and Woodworth, Constance (1973), Miss Elizabeth Arden, W. H. Allen. 33. Rubinstein, Helena, op. cit., pp. 25–6. 34. ibid., p. 34. 35. Osborne, John (1982), A Better Class of Person: An Autobiography 1929–1956, Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 35–6. 36. White, Doris (1980), D For Doris, V For Victory, Milton Keynes: Oakleaf Books, p. 63. 37. Banner, Lois, op. cit. 38. Turner, Bryan (1982), The Discourse of Diet', Theory, Culture and Society, Voi. 1, no. 1, Spring. 39. Byron, George Gordon, Lord (1982), Selected Prose, letter to his mother, 25 June 1811, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 82. 40. Hollander, Anne (1975), Seeing Through Clothes, New York: Avon Books. ## Chapter Six 1. Baldwin, Frances Elizabeth (1926), Sumptuary Legislation and Personal Regulation in England, Baltimore: John Hopkins Press. 2. Squire, Geoffrey (1974), Dress, Art and Society: 1560–1970, London: Studio Vista. 3. Elias, Norbert (1978), The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 4. Zeldin, Theodore (1977), France 1848–1945: Taste and Corruption, Oxford: University Press, p. 94. 5. Freud, Sigmund (1973), Femininity', New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 165. (Originally published in 1933.) 6. Ackroyd, Peter (1979), Dressing Up: Transvestism and Drag: The History of an Obsession, London: Thames and Hudson, p. 37. 7. Cobbe, Frances Power (1869), The Final Cause of Women', in Butler, Josephine (ed.) (1869), Woman's Work and Woman's Culture, London: Macmillan, pp. 10–11. 8. Nystrom, Paul (1928), Economics of Fashion, New York: Ronald Press, pp. 479–80. 9. Turim, Maureen (1983), 'Fashion Shapes: Film, The Fashion Industry and the Image of Women', Socialist Review, no. 71 (Vol. 13, no. 5), pp. 86–7. 10. Beauvoir, Simone de (1953), The Second Sex, London: Jonathan Cape, p. 505. 11. ibid., p. 509. 12. ibid., p. 512. 13. ibid. 14. Beaton, Cecil (1982), SelfPortrait with Friends: The Selected Diaries of Cecil Beaton 1926-1974, ed. Richard Buckle, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 14. 15. Benjamin, Walter (1973a), Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London: New Left Books, pp. 90, 95. 16. Haweis, Mary Eliza (1878), The Art of Beauty, London: Chatto and Windus, p. 274. 17. Roberts, Michèle (1983), The Visitation, London: The Women's Press. 18. Fitzgerald, Scott (1934), Tender is the Night, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 14. 19. Beaton, Cecil (1954), The Glass of Fashion, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 20. Michelson, Peter (1970), An Apology for Porn', in Hughes, Douglas (ed.) Perspectives on Pornography, New York: Macmillan. 21. Sartre, Jean-Paul (1969), Being and Nothingness, London: Methuen, p. 609. See also, Douglas, Mary (1966), Purity and Danger, Harmondsworth: Penguin. ## Chapter Seven 1. Balzac, Honoré de, (1971), Lost Illusions, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 165. 2. Engels, Friedrich (1973), The Condition of the Working Class in England, Moscow: Progress Publishers, p. 64. (Originally published in 1844.) 3. Simmel, Georg (1958), Soziologie, p. 486; quoted in Benjamin, Walter (1973a), Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London: New Left Books. 4. Benjamin, Walter, op. cit., p. 38. 5. Proust, Marcel (1981), Remembrance of Things Past: Vol. II: The Guermantes Way, translated by C. K. Scott Moncrieff and Terence Kilmartin, London: Chatto and Windus, p. 147. (Originally published in 1920.) 6. Sennett, Richard (1974), The Fall of Public Man, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 166. (I have drawn extensively on Sennett in this passage.) 7. Boswell, James (1966), Boswell's London Journal 1762–1763, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 201. 8. Simmel, Georg (1971), On Individuality and Social Forms: Selected Writings, ed. Donald N. Levine, Chicago: Chicago University Press, p. 311. 9. Proust, Marcel, op. cit., Vol. I: Swann's Way, p. 460. 10. Lee, Sarah Tomalin (1975), American Fashion, London: André Deutsch. 11. Stead, Christina (1945), A Little Tea, A Little Chat, London: Virago, pp. 59–60, 284–5. 12. Fiedorek, Mary B. (1983), Executive Style: Looking It, Living It, Piscataway, New Jersey: New Century Publishers; Molloy, John T. (1977), The Women's Dress for Success Book, Chicago: Follet Publishing Co. 13. My thanks to Lennie Goodings for drawing my attention to this article. 14. Berman, Marshall (1983), All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, London: Verso. 15. Jameson, Fredric (1984), Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism', New Left Review, no. 146, July/August, p. 89. 16. Lasch, Christopher (1979), The Culture of Narcissism, New York: Warner Books, p. 167. 17. Quoted in Adburgham, Alison (1981), Shops and Shopping: 1800– 1914, London: Allen and Unwin, p. 103. 18. Bloch, Ivan (1958), Sexual Life in England, London: Corgi Books, p. 109. ## References 19. Adburgham, Alison, op. cit. 20. Hower, Ralph M. (1946), History of Macy's of New York: 1858–1919, Cambridge, Ma.: Harvard University Press. 21. Adburgham, Alison, op. cit. 22. Ferry, John (1960), A History of the Department Store, New York: Macmillan. 23. Miller, Michael (1981), The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store: 1869–1920, London: Allen and Unwin. 24. Adburgham, Alison, op. cit 25. Ferry, John, op. cit. 26. Miller, Michael, op. cit. 27. Rees, Goronwy (1969), St Michael: A History of Marks and Spencer, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 28. Sally Brampton of the Observer, reporting (6 November 1983) on a recent survey of shopping preferences undertaken by Source Information Marketing, wrote that its findings suggested that customers now perceive the department store as anonymous’, and are demanding the old-fashioned’ services of intimate surroundings and personal attention formerly associated precisely with the department store, and from which the 1960s boutiques broke away. 29. See the Guardian, 6 September 1984. ## Chapter Eight 1. Braudel, Fernand (1981), Civilization and Capitalism: Fifteenth to Eighteenth Centuries: Vol. I: The Structures of Everyday Life: The Limits of the Possible, London: Collins, p. 313. 2. Pinchbeck, Ivy (1981), Women Workers and the Industrial Revolution: 1750–1850, with a new introduction by Kerry Hamilton, London: Virago, p. 312. (Originally published in 1930.) 3. Barlee, Ellen (1863), A Visit to Lancashire in December 1862, London: Seeley -and Co., pp. 25–7. 4. Stanley, Liz (ed.) (1984), The Diaries of Hannah Cullwick, Victorian Maidservant, London: Virago, p. 231. 5. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth (1982), Channels of Desire: Mass Images and the Shaping of the American Consciousness, New York: McGraw Hill. 6. Hollander, Anne (1975), Seeing Through Clothes, New York: Avon Books. 7. Adburgham, Alison (1981), Shops and Shopping: 1800–1914, London: Allen and Unwin. 8. See Chapter Ten. 9. Marx, Karl (1970), Capital, Vol. I, London: Lawrence and Wishart, p. 399. (Originally published in translation in 1886.) The quotation is taken from Dr H.J. Hunter's Report on rural housing, P.P. 1864 (3416) XXVIII, 6th Report of the Medical Officer of the Privy Council, Apps. 13–14, p. 456. 10. Rhondda, Margaret Haigh, Viscountess (1933), This Was My World, London: Macmillan, p. 278. 11. Fitzgibbon, Theodora (1983), With Love: An Autobiography 1938– 1946, London: Pan Books. 12. Mitford, Nancy (1974), The Pursuit of Love, in The Best Novels of Nancy Mitford, London: Hamish Hamilton, p. 134. (Originally published in 1945.) 13. Kunzle, David (1982), Fashion and Fetishism, Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, pp. 84–5. 14. Beaton, Cecil, op. cit 15. Anderson, Jervis (1982), Harlem: The Great Black Way 1900–1950, London: Orbis, p. 72. 16. Benthall, Jeremy (1976), The Body Electric: Patterns of Western Industrial Culture, London: Thames and Hudson. 17. Bailey, Margaret J. (1981), Those Glorious Glamour Years, Secaucus, New Jersey: Citadel Press, quotes figures of as little as \$16.50 for a forty-hour week for a seamstress, and the starting salary of Edith Head, who later became a major MGM designer, was \$30.00 as a sketcher, again for a six-day week. See also Hertzog, Charlotte and Gaines, Jane (1983), 'Hollywood, Costumes and the Fashion Industry', Triangle Cinema Programme, Birmingham, April–June. 18. Hollander, Anne, op. cit., pp. 342–3. 19. Eckert, Charles (1978), The Carole Lombard in Macy's Window', Quarterly Review of Film Studies, Winter; Gustafson, Robert (1982), The Power of the Screen: The Influence of Edith Head's Film Designs on the Retail Fashion Market', The Velvet Light Trap: Review of Cinema, no. 19. 20. Jameson, Fredric (1984), Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism', New Left Review, no. 146, July/August, p. 65. 21. Warhol, Andy and Hackett, Pat (1980), POPism: The Warhol '60s, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, p. 43. 22. Ironside, Janey (1973), Janey: An Autobiography, London: Michael Joseph, p. 126. 23. Quant, Mary (1966), Quant by Quant, London: Cassell, p. 2. ## References 24. Melly, George (1972), Revolt Into Style: The Pop Arts in Britain, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 147. 25. Quant, Mary, op. cit., p. 75. 26. Melly, George, op. cit., p. 148. 27. Warhol, Andy and Hackett, Pat, op. cit., p. 163. ## Chapter Nine 1. Melly, George (1972), Revolt Into Style: The Pop Arts in Britain, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 2. Laver, James (1968), Dandies, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson; Moers, Ellen (1960), The Dandy: Brummell to Beerbohm, London: Secker and Warburg. 3. Laver, James, op. cit. (1968), p. 21. 4. Moers, Ellen, op. cit. 5. Goffman, Erving (1969), The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, London: Allen Lane, p. 29. 6. Smith, James (c. 1820), note appended to seventeenth edition of Rejected Addresses. I am indebted to Tony Halliday for this reference. 7. Baudelaire, Charles (1859), Le Dandy', Ecrits sur l’Art, Tome 2, Paris: Le Livre de Poche, p. 175. 8. ibid. 9. Cowley, Malcolm (1951), Exile's Return, New York: Viking, p. 55. See also Parry, Albert (1960), Garrets and Pretenders: A History of Bohemianism in America, New York: Dover Publications. (Originally published in 1933.) 10. Field, Andrew (1983), The Formidable Miss Barnes: The Life ofDjuna Barnes, London: Secker and Warburg, p. 59. 11. ibid., p. 83. 12. Cowley, Malcolm, op. cit., p. 62. See also Ware, Carolin (1935), Greenwich Village 1920–1930: A Comment on American Civilisation in the Postwar Years, Boston: Houghton Miflin. 13. Spalding, Frances (1983), Vanessa Bell, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, pp. 244–5. 14. Ironside, Janey (1973), Janey: An Autobiography, London: Michael Joseph, p. 39. 15. Fitzgibbon, Theodora (1983), With Love: An Autobiography 1938– 1946, London: Pan Books, p. 124. 16. Beauvoir, Simone de (1963), Force of Circumstance, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 47. 17. ibid., pp. 151–2. 18. Taylor, Lou (1983), Mourning Dress: A Costume and Social History, London: Allen and Unwin. 19. Proust, Marcel (1981), Remembrance of Things Past: Vol. III: Time Regained, p. 744. 20. Frith, Simon (1983), Sound Effects: Youth, Leisure and the Politics of Rock and Roll, London: Constable. 21. Priestley, J. B. (1934), English Journey, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 375. 22. Frith, Simon, op. cit. 23. MacInnes, Colin (1959), Absolute Beginners, London: Allison and Busby, p. 17. 24. ibid., p. 62. 25. Fyvel, T. R. (1961), The Insecure Offenders, London: Chatto and Windus. 26. Melly, George, op. cit., p. 150. 27. Frith, Simon, op. cit., p. 220. 28. Hebdige, Dick (1979), Subculture: The Meaning of Style, London: Methuen, p. 107. 29. ibid. 30. Sampson, Kevin and Rimmer, David (1983), ‘The Ins and Outs of High Street Fashion', The Face, July, Pp. 20–22. 31. Cosgrove, Stuart (1984), The Zoot Suit and Style Warfare', History Workshop Journal, Issue 18, Autumn. 32. Malcolm X (1965), The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 164, 137–8. 33. Keenan, Brigid (1977), The Women We Wanted to Look Like, New York: St Martins Press, p. 178. 34. Goldman, A. (1974), Ladies and Gentlemen, Lenny Bruce, London: Panther, quoted in Hebdige, Dick, op. cit. 35. Walter, Aubrey (ed.) (1981), Fuck the Family', Come Together: The Years of Gay Liberation 1970–1973, London: Gay Men's Press, pp. 156-7. 36. See Altman, Dennis (1982), The Homosexualization of America, Boston: Beacon Press. 37. Jameson, Fredric (1984), Postmodernism or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism', New Left Review, no. 146, July/August, pp. 56, 87. 38. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth (1982), Channels of Desire: Mass Images and the Shaping of the American Consciousness, New York: McGraw Hill, p. 237. ## References 39. Benjamin, Walter (1973b), The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction', Illuminations, London: Fontana, pp. 243–4. 40. Anscombe, Isabelle (1984), A Woman's Touch: Women in Design from 1860 to The Present Day, London: Virago, p. 95. 41. Museum of Modern Art, Oxford (1984), Art Into Production: Soviet Textiles, Fashion and Ceramics 1917-1935, Oxford: Museum of Modern Art. ## Chapter Ten 1. Banner, Lois (1983), American Beauty, New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 2. Taylor, Barbara (1983b), Eve and the New Jerusalem, London: Virago, p. 255. 3. Kunzle, David (1982), Fashion and Fetishism, Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, p. 122. 4. Banner, Lois, op. cit. 5. Adburgham, Alison (1961), A Punch History of Manners and Modes, London: Hutchinson. 6. Haweis, Mary Eliza (1878), Pre-Raphaelite Dress', quoted in Newton, Stella Mary (1974), Health, Art and Reason: Dress Reformers of the Nineteenth Century, London: John Murray, p. 53. 7. Jenkyns, Richard (1980), The Victorians and Ancient Greece, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, p. 301. 8. Ballin, Ada (1885), The Science of Dress in Theory and Practice, London: Sampson Low. 9. Newton, Stella Mary (1976), 'Couture and Society', Times Literary Supplement, 12 November. 10. ibid. 11. Katherine Anthony is quoted in Banner, Lois, op. cit. For the reference to Henry van der Velde, see Anscombe, Isabelle (1984), A Woman's Touch: Women in Design from 1860 to the Present Day, London: Virago, p. 95. 12. Banner, Lois, op. cit. 13. Rowbotham, Sheila and Weeks, Jeffrey (1977), Socialism and the New Life: The Personal and Sexual Politics of Edward Carpenter and Havelock Ellis, London: Pluto, p. 68. 14. ibid., p. 116. 15. Flugel, J. C. (1930), The Psychology of Clothes, London: Hogarth Press, p. 218. 16. ibid., pp. 234–5. 17. ibid., p. 233. 18. For an extended discussion of eugenicism and the left, see Werskey, Gary (1978), The Visible College: A Collective Biography of British Scientists and Socialists of the 1930s, London: Allen Lane. 19. Morton, A. L. (1952), The English Utopia, London: Lawrence and Wishart. 20. Heard, Gerald (1924), Narcissus: An Anatomy of Clothes, London: Kegan Paul, p. 142. 21. ibid., p. 155. 22. Bernal, J. D. (1929), The World the Flesh and the Devil: An Enquiry Into The Three Enemies of the Rational Soul, London: Kegan Paul, p. 57. Quoted in Wood, Neal (1959), Communism and British Intellectuals, London: Victor Gollancz, p. 139. 23. Haynes, Alan (1983), 'Murderous Millinery: The Struggle for the Plumage Act, 1921’, History Today, July, pp. 26–31. 24. Gilman, Charlotte Perkins (1979), Herland, London: The Women's Press. (Originally published in 1915.) 25. Nesbit, E. (1959), The Story of the Amulet, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 224. (Originally published in 1901.) See also, Moore, Doris Langley (1967), E. Nesbit: A Biography, London: Ernest Benn. 26. Hamilton, Mary Agnes (1936), 'Changes in Social Life', in Strachey, Ray (ed.) (1936), Our Freedom and Its Results, London: Hogarth Press, p. 237. 27. Quoted in Phillips, Pearson (1963), The New Look', in Sissons, Michael and French, Philip (1963), The Age of Austerity 1945–1951, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 28. Lang, Kurt and Lang, Gladys (1961), Fashion: Identification and Differentiation in the Mass Society', in Roach, Mary Ellen and Eicher, Jane Bubolz (1965), Dress Adornment and the Social Order, New York: John Wiley. 29. Phillips, Pearson, op. cit. ## Chapter Eleven 1. Haweis, Mary Eliza (1818), 'Pre-Raphaelite Dress', quoted in Newton, Stella Mary (1974), Health, Art and Reason: Dress Reformers of the Nineteenth Century, London: John Murray, p. 9. The diary quotation comes from Howe, Bea (1967), Arbiter of Elegance, London: The Harvill Press, p. 69. 2. Beaton, Cecil, op. cit. 3. I thought I remembered reading of a demonstration that was staged on Wall Street, New York City, at which bras were symbolically burned. An account of a demonstration against the Miss America Contest, which took place in Atlantic City in August 1968, is accompanied by a note from the editor of the anthology in which it appears saying Bras were never burned’; however, one feature of the demonstration was a huge Freedom Trash Can (into which we will throw bras, girdles, curlers, false eyelashes, wigs, and representative issues of Cosmopolitan, Ladies' Home Journal, Family Circle, etc. Bring any such woman-garbage you have around the house)’. See Morgan, Robin (ed.) (1970), Sisterhood is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings from the Women's Liberation Movement, New York: Random House, p. 521. See also O'Sullivan, Sue (1982), Passionate Beginnings: Ideological Politics 1969–82', Feminist Review, no. 11, for an account of the English demonstration against the Miss World Contest at the Albert Hall, London, in November 1970. 4. Chalmers, Martin (1983), 'Politics of Crisis', in City Limits, 19–25 August. 5. See Snitow, Ann, Stansell, Christine and Thompson, Sharon (1984), Desire: The Politics of Sexuality, London: Virago, for a discussion of some of these issues. 6. Brownmiller, Susan (1984), Femininity, New York: Linden Press, Simon and Schuster. I am indebted for the information about Susan Brownmiller's book to Chapkis, Wendy (1984), The Gender Divide: A Discussion of Femininity by Susan Brownmiller', Unpublished paper. 7. Radcliffe Richards, Janet (1980), The Sceptical Feminist, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul 8. I have avoided the discussion of vegetarianism here. There is, of course, a whole series of preoccupations surrounding food, some of which are, supposedly at any rate, concerned with health, some with the exploitation of animals, some with conditions in the developing countries. The point still seems to me to stand – that western radical culture is far less ascetic about food – or drink – than it is about dress. 9. I have myself heard women refer to all nude paintings in the National Gallery, London, as pornography. Bel Mooney tells a similar anecdote in the Sunday Times (March 1984). Obviously this is a generalization on the basis of anecdote and open to criticism on that score; but such views do flavour parts of the radical scene. 10. The original article was Wilson, Elizabeth (1982), If You're so Sure You're a Feminist, Why do you read the Fashion Page?, Guardian, 26 July. The letters appeared on 2 August 1982. 11. For a description of this event, see Wilson, Elizabeth (1982), What is to be Done about Violence towards Women?, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 12. Banner, Lois (1983), American Beauty, New York: Alfred Knopf. 13. Martin, Bernice (1981), A Sociology of Contemporary Cultural Change, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, p. 51. 14. Baudrillard, Jean (1981), For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, St Louis, Mo.: Telos Press, p. 97. ## Chapter 12 1. Lemire, Beverly (1997), Dress, Culture and Commerce: The English Clothing Trade Before the Factory, 1660-1800, Basingstoke: Macmillan; Harte, Negley B. (1991), 'The Economics of Clothing in the Late Seventeenth Century', in Harte, Negley B. (ed.), Fabrics and Fashions, London. 2. See Harvey, John (1995), Men in Black, London: Reaktion Books. 3. 'Essex girl' (or man) was a British euphemism for vulgar, ill-mannered, hooliganish. It referred to the way in which newly affluent cockney Londoners moved east to satellite towns in Essex, such as Basildon, where they flaunted their loadsa money' (the catch phrase of a satiric stereotype invented by the stand-up comedian Harry Enfield). 4. Hume, Marion (1993), The New Mood', Independent on Sunday, Magazine Section, 16 May, p. 14. 5. See Gill, Alison (1998), Deconstruction Fashion: The Making of Unfinished, Decomposing and Re-assembled Clothes', Fashion Theory, Vol 2, issue 1, March, pp. 25–49. 6. Fraser, Kennedy (1985), The Fashionable Mind: Reflections on Fashion, 1970–1982, Boston: David R. Godine, p. 125. 7. Silverman, Kaja (1986), ‘Fragments of a Fashionable Discourse', in Modleski, Tania (ed.), Studies in Entertainment: Critical Approaches to Mass Culture, Bloomington and Indianopolis: Indiana University Press, p. 150. 8. Bolle, Namalee (2001), Anyone for Seconds?', Evening Standard, Tuesday, 1 May. 9. Tarrant, Naomi (1994), The Development of Costume, Edinburgh: National Museums of Scotland in conjunction with Routledge. 10. Brooks, David (2000), Bobos in Paradise: The New Upper Class and How They Got There, New York: Simon and Schuster, p. 204. 11. Brooks, David, op. cit., p. 85 and passim. 12. Lipovetsky, Gilles (1994), The Empire of Fashion: Dressing Modern Democracy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, trans. C Porter. 13. Friedman, Vanessa ( 1998), 'Stealth Wealth', Frank, September, p. 98. 14. After the death of Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother at the beginning of 2002, one BBC presenter, Peter Sissons, was taken to task by the media for wearing a burgundy rather than a black tie, this another index of casualisation. 15. Hollander, Anne (1994), Sex and Suits: The Evolution of Modern Dress, New York: Alfred Knopf, p. 113. 16. Gibson, William (1989), Neuromancer, Harmondsworth: Penguin. 17. Hollander, Anne, op. cit., p.166. 18. However, when in a fashion class I suggested that the very concept of mutton dressed as lamb’ had disappeared, one student vociferously disagreed, insisting that older women who dressed youthfully were still held in contempt by the young themselves. It would be interesting to investigate the truth of this claim. 19. Armstrong, Lisa (2000), Frock'n'roll hall of fame', the London Times, section 2, Monday 24 July, p. 15. 20. Appadurai, Arjun (1986), 'Introduction', in Appadurai, Arjun (ed.), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 21. 21. c.f. Eicher, Joanne (2001), Dress, Gender and the Public Display of Skin', in Entwistle, Jo and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), Body Dressing, Oxford: Berg, pp. 233–252. 22. Vine, Sarah (2001), 'Naked Ambition', the London Times, section 2, Wednesday, February 28, p. 5. 23. Williams, Zoe (2001), 'Do My Nipples Look Big In This?', London Evening Standard, Wednesday 28 February, p. 31. 24. Shulman, Nicola (2002), 'In excess of amorous intentions', Times Literary Supplement, 24 May, p. 12. 25. Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley (1997), Selected Letters, Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 149. 26. Brown, Malcom D. (2001), ‘'Multiple Meanings of the “Hijab" in Contemporary France', in Keenan, William J.F. (ed.), Dressed to Impress: Looking the Part, Oxford: Berg, p. 105. 27. Khan, Naseem (1992), ‘Asian Women's Dress: From Burqah to Bloggs – Changing Clothes for Changing Times', in Ash , Juliet and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), Chic Thrills: A Fashion Reader, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992, pp. 61–74. 28. Gluckman, Dale Carolyn and Takeda, Sharon Sadado, et al., (1992), 'Introduction', When Art Became Fashion: Kosode in Edo-Period Japan, Los Angeles, CA: Weatherill and the Los Angeles County Museum, pp. 29–41. 29. Daly, M Catherine (2000), ‘The Afghan Woman's “Chaadaree": An Evocative Religious Expression?', in Arthur, Linda B. (ed.), Undressing Religion: Commitment and Conversion from a Cross-Cultural Perspective, Oxford: Berg, pp. 131–145. 30. Shirazi, Fagheh (2000), ‘Islamic Religion and Women's Dress Code', in Arthur, Linda B. (ed.), p. 116. 31. Ibid., pp. 120–121. 32. The word used for these is pardösüs which comes from the French pardessus. 33. Also derived from the French. 34. Navaro-Yashin, Yael (2001), ‘The Market for Identities: Secularism, Islamism, Commodities', in Kandiyoti, Deniz and Saktanber, Ayse (eds.), Fragments of Culture: The Everyday of Modern Turkey, London: I.B. Tauris p.225. 35. Guindi, Fadwa El (1999), Veil: Modesty, Privacy and Resistance, Oxford: Berg, p.144. 36. Stimpfl, Joseph (2001), ‘Veiling and Unveiling: reconstructing Malay Female Identity in Singapore', in Arthur, Linda B. (ed.), pp. 169–182. 37. Brown, Malcolm D., op. cit., p. 116. 38. Ibid., p. 118. 39. Ibid., p. 117. 40. For example, the late C. S. Lewis, now best remembered for his religiously inspired children's books, such as The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, was a well known Christian apologist in his lifetime, who wrote of 'sky man' and earth woman'. 41. Lemire, Beverley, op. cit., p. 47. 42. Ibid., p. 121. 43. Leopold, Ellen (1992), ‘The Manufacture of the Fashion System', in Ash , Juliet and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), pp. 101-117. 44. Entwistle, Jo (2000), The Fashioned Body: Fashion, Dress and Modern Social Theory, Cambridge: Polity Press, p. 208. See also Fine, Ben and Leopold, Ellen (1993), The World of Consumption, London: Routledge. 45. Ibid., p. 210. 46. Sherwood, James (2000), Great Minds Think Alike', Independent on Sunday, 'Reality Magazine', p.8. 47. Entwistle, Jo, op. cit. 48. McRobbie, Angela, (1998), British Fashion Design: Rag Trade or Image Industry?, London: Routledge. 49. Evans, Caroline (2002), Fashion Stranger than Fiction: Shelley Fox', in Breward, Christopher, Conekin, Becky and Cox, Caroline (eds.), The Englishness of English Dress, Oxford: Berg, pp. 189–212. 50. Simmel, Georg (1971), Fashion', in Levine, D. (ed.), On Individuality and Social Forms, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, (1904). 51. Lemire, Beverley, op. cit., pp. 122–123. 52. Silverman, Debra (1986), Selling Culture: Bloomingdales, Diana Vreeland and the New Aristocracy of Taste in Reagan's America, New York: Pantheon Books, p.35, quoting Rita Rief. 53. Ellison, Michael (2000), ‘Giorgio's New Emporium', London Guardian, Saturday 16 December. 54. Sudjic, Deyan (2001), 'Is the Future of Art in Their Hands?"', London Observer, review section, Sunday 14 October, p. 1. 55. Evans, Caroline (1999), ‘Masks Mirrors and Mannequins: Elsa Schiaparelli and the Decentred Subject', Fashion Theory, Vol 3, issue 1, March, pp. 3–32. 56. Evans, Caroline (2001), 'Desire and Dread: Alexander McQueen and the Contemporary Femme Fatale', in Entwistle, Jo and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), p. 202. 57. Ibid., p. 204. 58. Ibid., Pp. 204–7. 59. Rebecca Arnold has touched on similar themes in Fashion Desire and Anxiety: Image and Morality in the Twentieth Century, London: I.B. Tauris, 2001. 60. Evans, Caroline (1998), ‘The Golden Dustman: a Critical Evaluation of the Work of Martin Margiela and a Review of Martin Margiela: Exhibition: (9/4/1615)', Fashion Theory, Vol 2, issue 1, March, p. 77. 61. See also Evans, Caroline (2003), Fashion at the Edge: Spectacle, Modernity and Deathliness, London: Yale, for a reworking of some of these ideas. 62. For discussions of this issue see Kim, Sun Bok (1998), ‘Is Fashion Art?', Fashion Theory, Vol 2, issue 1, March, pp. 51–72; and Martin, Richard (1999), A Note: Art and Fashion, Viktor and Rolf, Fashion Theory, Vol 3, issue 1, March, pp. 109–121. 63. Taylor, Lou (1998), 'Doing the Laundry? A Reassessment of Object-based Dress History', Fashion Theory, Methodology Special Issue, Vol 2 issue 4, December, pp. 347–348. 64. Taylor, Lou (1999), 'Wool cloth and gender: The Use of Woollen Cloth in Women's Dress in Britain, 1865-85’, in de la Haye, Amy and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), Defining Dress: Dress as Object, Meaning and Identity, Manchester: Manchester University Press, p. 44. 65. See Breward, Christopher (1999), The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, Fashion and City Life, 1860–1914, Manchester: Manchester University Press. 66. See Craik, Jennifer (1994), The Face of Fashion: Cultural Studies in Fashion, London: Routledge. 67. Breward, Christopher (1998), 'Cultures, Identities, Histories: Fashioning a Cultural Approach to Dress', Fashion Theory, Methodological special issue, Vol 2, no 4, December, p. 306. See also Breward, Christopher (1994), The Culture of Fashion: A New History of Fashionable Dress, Manchester: Manchester University Press, for a comprehensive discussion of these issues. See also, for a review of recent developments in object-based dress history, Palmer, Alexandra (1997), New Directions: Fashion History Studies and Research in North America and England', Fashion Theory, Vol 1, issue 3, September, pp. 297–312. 68. Warwick, Alexander and Cavallaro, Dani (1998), Fashioning the Frame: Boundaries, Dress and the Body, Oxford: Berg, pp. 3, 7. 69. Ibid., p. 35. 70. Ibid., p. 37, quoting Bové, Carol Mastrangelo (1984), The Politics of Desire in Julia Kristeva', Boundary 2: A Journal of Postmodern Literature, Part 12, p.219. 71. Taylor, Lou (2002), The Study of Dress History, Manchester: Manchester University Press, p. 4. 72. Barnard, Malcolm (1996), Fashion as Communication, London: Routledge. 73. Palmer, Alexandra, op. cit., p. 300. For example I – like many others – was insufficiently aware in 1985 of changes over time in non-Western dress, for example traditional Japanese dress, although I would still defend the definition of the fully developed fashion cycle as an essentially European phenomenon, based on emergent capitalism and its associated regimes of consumption. ## References 74. Tarrant, Naomi, op.cit., p. 1. 75. Taylor, Lou, op. cit., p. 85, quoting Rexford, Nancy (1998), ‘Studying Garments for Their Own Sake: Mapping the World of Costume Scholarship', Dress 14, p. 74. 76. For example, the important work of Aileen Ribeiro, who has extensively studied dress in relation particularly to historical painting and other images. See, for example, Ribeiro, Aileen (1988) Fashion in the French Revolution, New York: Holmes & Meier, and (1995) The Art of Dress: Fashion in England and France 1750–1820, New Haven, CN: Yale University Press. 77. Kopytoff, Igor (1986), ‘The Cultural Biography of Things: Commodisation and Process', in Appadurai, Arjun (ed.), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 64–91. 78. Taylor, Lou, op. cit., p. 85. 79. Benjamin, Walter (1999), The Arcades Project, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin McLaughlin, p. 69. 80. Benjamin, Walter (1979), ‘Surrealism: The Last Snapshot of the European Intelligentsia', in One Way Street, London: Verso, p. 229. 81. Benjamin also held it capable of inducing revolutionary nihilism', but I refrain from making that claim for fashion. 82. Lehmann, Ulrich (1999), 'Tigersprung', Fashion Theory, Vol 3, no 3, September, p. 301. See also Lehmann, Ulrich (2000), Tigersprung: Fashion in Modernity, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ## Bibliography Ackroyd, Peter (1979), Dressing Up: Transvestism and Drag: The History of an Obsession, London: Thames and Hudson. Adburgham, Alison (1961), A Punch History of Manners and Modes, London: Hutchinson, (1981), Shops and Shopping 1800–1914, London: Allen and Unwin. Adorno, Theodor (1967), Prisms, Cambridge MA: MIT Press. Alexander, Sally (1976), ‘Women's Work in Nineteenth Century London: A Study of the Years 1820–1850', in Mitchell, Juliet and Oakley, Ann, (eds.). Altman, Denis (1982), The Homosexualisation of America, Boston: Beacon Press. Anderson, Jervis (1982), Harlem: The Great Black Way 1900-1950, London: Orbis. Anderson, Perry (1984), 'Modernity and Revolution', New Left Review, no 144. Anscombe, Isabelle (1984), A Woman's Touch: Women in Design from 1860 to the Present Day, London: Virago. Angeloglou, Maggie (1970), A History of Makeup, London: Studio Vista. Appadurai, Arjun (ed.) (1986), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Armstrong, Lisa (2000), ‘Frock'n'roll Hall of Fame', London Times, section 2, 24 July. Arnold, Rebecca (2001), Fashion Desire and Anxiety: Image and Morality in the Twentieth Century, London: I.B.Tauris. Arthur, Linda B. (ed.) (2000), Undressing Religion: Commitment and Conversion from a Cross-Cultural Perspective, Oxford: Berg. Ash, Juliet and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.) (1992), Chic Thrills: A Fashion Reader, Berkeley: University of California Press. Bailey, Margaret (1981), Those Glorious Glamour Years, Secaucus, NJ: Citadel Press. ## Bibliography Baldwin, Frances Elizabeth (1926), Sumptuary Legislation and Personal Regulation in England, Baltimore: John Hopkins Press. Ballin, Ada (1885), The Science of Dress in Theory and Practice, London: Sampson and Low. Balzac, Honoré de (1971), Lost Illusions, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Banner, Lois (1983), American Beauty, New York: Alfred Knopf. Barlee, Ellen (1863), A Visit to Lancashire in December 1862, London: Seeley and Co. Barthes, Roland ( 1967), Système de la Mode, Paris: Éditions de Seuil. Baudelaire, Charles (1859), 'Le dandy', Écrits sur l'art, tome 2, Paris: Livre de Poche. Baudrillard, Jean (1981), For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign, St Louis, MO: Telos Press. Beaton, Cecil (1954), The Glass of Fashion, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. (1982), Self Portrait with Friends: The Selected Diaries of Cecil Beaton 1926–1974, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Beauvoir, Simone de (1953), The Second Sex, London: Jonathan Cape. (1963), The Prime of Life, Harmondsworth: Penguin. \_ (1965), Force of Circumstance, Harmondsworth: Penguin Bell, Quentin (1947), Ôf Human Finery, London: Hogarth Press. Benjamin, Walter (1973a), Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of High Capitalism, London: Verso. (1973b), Illuminations, London: Fontana. (1979), One Way Street, London: Verso. (1999), The Arcades Project, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin McLaughlin. Benthall, Jeremy (1976), The Body Electric: Patterns of Western Industrial Culture, London: Thames and Hudson. Bergler, Edmund (1953), Fashion and the Unconscious, New York: Robert Brunner. Berman, Marshall (1983), All That Is Solid Melts Into Air, London: Verso. Bernal, J. D. (1929), The World the Flesh and the Devil: An Enquiry into the Three Enemies of the Rational Soul, London: Kegan Paul. Bertin, Célia (1956), Paris à la Mode: A Voyage of Discovery, London: Victor Gollancz. Black, Clementina (1983), Married Women's Work: Being the Report of an Enquiry Undertaken by the Women's Industrial Čouncil, London: Virago. Orig. publ. 1915. Bloch, Ivan (1958), Sexual Life in England, London: Corgi Books. Boehn, Max Von (1932), Modes and Manners Vol. I: From the Decline of the Ancient World to the Renaissance, London: Harrap. Bolle, Namalee (2001), ‘Anyone for Seconds?' London Evening Standard, 1 May. Boswell, James (1966), Boswell's London Journal 1762–1763, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Braudel, Fernand (1981), Civilisation and Capitalism from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century Vol I: the Structures of Everyday Life: The Limits of the Possible, London: Collins. Bray, Alan (1983), Homosexuality in Renaissance England, London: Gay Men's Press. Breward, Christopher (1994), The Culture of Fashion: A New History of Fashionable Dress, Manchester: Manchester University Press. (1998), ‘Cultures, Identities, Histories: Fashioning a Cultural Approach to Dress', Fashion Theory, Methodology Special Issue, Vol 2, no 4, December, pp. 301–314. (1999), The Hidden Consumer: Masculinities, Fashion and City Life 1860–1914, Manchester: Manchester University Press. Conekin, Becky and Coz, Caroline (ed.) (2002), The Englishness of English Dress, Oxford: Berg. Briscoe, Lyndon (1971), The Textile and Clothing Industries of the United Kingdom, Manchester: Manchester University Press. Brooks, David (2000), Bobos in Paradise: The New Upper Class and How They Got There, New York: Simon and Schuster. Brown, Malcolm (2001), 'Multiple Meanings of the “Hijab" in Contemporary France', in Keenan, William J. F. (ed.). Brownmiller, Susan (1984), Femininity, New York: Simon and Schuster. Burckhardt, Jacob (1955), The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, London: Phaidon Press. Orig. publ.1860. Butler, Josephine (ed.) (1869), Woman's Work and Woman's Culture Byron, George Gordon, Lord (1982), Selected Prose, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Campbell, Beatrix (1979), Lining their Pockets', Time Out, 13–19 July. Carlyle, Thomas (1831), Sartor Resartus, London: Curwen Press. Carter, Angela (1982), Nothing Sacred, London: Virago. Chalmers, Martin (1983), Politics of Crisis', City Limits, 19–25 August. Chapkis, Wendy and Enloe, Cynthia (1983), Of Common Cloth Women in the Global Textile Industry, Amsterdam: Transnational Institute. Charles-Roux, Edmonde (1975), Chanel, London: Jonathan Cape. Chase, Edna Woolman (1954), Always in Vogue, London: Victor Gollancz. Chisholm, Anne (1981), Nancy Cunard, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Cobbe, Frances Power (1869), ‘The Final Cause of Women', in Butler, Josephine (ed.). Cowley, Malcolm (1951), Exile's Return, New York: Viking. Coyle, Angela (1982), ‘Sex and Skill in the Organization of the Clothing Industry', in West, Jackie (ed.). Culler, Jonathan (1975), Structuralist Poetics, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Cunnington, Cecil Willett (1941), Why Women Wear Clothes, London: Faber and Faber. (1950), Women, Pleasures of Life' Series, London: Burke. and Cunnington, Phillis (1951), The History of Underclothes, London: Michael Joseph. Cunnington, Phillis and Lucas, Catherine (1967), Occupational Costume in England from the Eleventh Century to 1914, London: Adam & Charles Black. Daly, M. Catherine (2000), ‘The Afghan Woman's "Chaadaree": An Evocative Religious Expression?', in Arthur, Linda B. (ed.). Darwin, Charles (1845), The Voyage of the Beagle, London: J M Dent and Charles Black. Delbourg-Delphis, Marylène (1981), Le Chic et Le Look: Histoire de la Mode Féminine et des Moeurs de 1850 à Nos Jours, Paris: Hachette. Dickens, Charles (1970), Dombey and Son, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Orig publ. 1848. (1976), 'Meditations in Monmouth Street', in Selected Short Fiction, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Orig. publ.1836. Dior, Christian (1957), Dior by Dior, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Disher, M. L. (1947), American Factory Production of Women's Clothing, London: Deveraux Publications. Dobbs, J. L. (1928), The Clothing Workers of Great Britain, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Dooley, William H. (1934), Economics of Clothing and Textiles, Boston: D. C. Heath. Douglas, Mary (1966), Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Duff Gordon, Lucy, Lady (1932), Discretions and Indiscretions, London: Jarrolds. Eckert, Charles (1978), ‘The Carole Lombard in Macy's Window' Quarterly Review of Film Studies, Winter. Eicher, Joanne (2001), 'Dress, Gender and the Public Display of Skin', in Entwistle, Jo and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.) pp. 233–252. El Guindi, Fadwa (1999), Veil: Modesty, Privacy and Resistance, Oxford: Berg. Elias, Norbert (1978), The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Trans. Edmund Jephcott. Ellison, Michael (2000), ‘Giorgio's New Emporium', London Guardian, 16 December. Elson, Diane and Pearson, Ruth (1981), "Nimble Fingers Make Cheap Workers": An Analysis of Women's Employment in Third World Export Manufacturing', Feminist Review, no. 7, Spring. Engels, Friedrich (1844), The Condition of the Working Class in England, Moscow: Progress Publishers. Entwistle, Jo (2000), The Fashioned Body: Fashion, Dress and Modern Social Theory, Cambridge: Polity Press. and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.) (2001), Body Dressing, Oxford: Berg. Etherington Smith, Meredith (1983), Patou, London: Hutchinson. Evans, Caroline (1998), ‘The Golden Dustman: A Critical Evaluation of the Work of Martin Margiela and a Review of Martin Margiela: Exhibition (9/4/1615), Fashion Theory, Vol 2, issue 1, March, pp. 73-94. (1999), Masks, Mirrors and Mannequins: Elsa Schiaparelli and the Decentred Subject', Fashion Theory, Vol 3, issue 1, March, pp. 3-32. (2001), 'Desire and Dread: Alexander McQueen and the Contemporary Femme Fatale', in Entwistle, Jo and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), Pp. 201–214. (20ō2), Fashion Stranger than Fiction: Shelley Fox', in Breward, Christopher, Conekin, Becky and Cox, Caroline (eds.), pp. 189–212. (2003), Fashion at the Edge: Spectacle, Modernity and Deathliness, London: Yale University Press. Ewen, Stuart and Ewen, Elizabeth (1982), Channels of Desire: Mass Images of the Shaping of the American Consciousness, New York: McGraw Hill. Ewing, Elizabeth (1974), History of Twentieth Century Fashion, London: Batsford. (1978), Dress and Undress: a History of Women's Underwear, London: Batsford. Faust, Beatrice (1981), Women, Sex and Pornography, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Ferry, John (1960), A History of the Department Store, New York: Macmillan. Field, Andrew (1983), The Formidable Miss Barnes: The Life of Djuna Barnes, London: Secker and Warburg. Fiedorek, Mary B. (1983), Exeuctive Style: Looking it, Living it, Piscataway, NJ: New Century Publishers. Fine, Ben and Leopold, Ellen (1993), The World of Consumption, London: Routledge. Fitzgerald, Scott (1934), Tender is the Night, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Flaubert, Gustave (1857), Madame Bovary, Paris: Livre de Poche. Flügel, J. C. (1930), The Psychology of Clothes, London: Hogarth Press. Foster, John (1974), Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution, London: Methuen. Foucault, Michel (1979), The History of Sexuality: Vol I: An Introduction, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Frascina, Francis and Harrison, Charles (eds.) (1982), Modern Art and Modernism: A Critical Anthology, London: Harper Row. ## Bibliography Fraser, Grace Lovat (1948), Textiles by Britain, London: George Allen & Unwin. Fraser, Kennedy (1985), The Fashionable Mind: Reflections on Fashion 1970–1982, Boston: David R. Godine. Freud, Sigmund (1977), On Sexuality: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality and Other Works, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Orig. pubi. 1905. Trans. Angela Richards. (1973), Femininity', in New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Orig. pubi. 1933. Friedman, Vanessa (1998), 'Stealth Wealth', Frank, September. Fyvel, T. R. (1961), The Insecure Offenders, London: Chatto and Windus. George, M. Dorothy (1925), London Life in the Eighteenth Century, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Gibbon, Edward (1952), The Portable Gibbon: The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Gibson, William (1989), Neuromancer, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Gill, Alison (1998), Deconstruction Fashion: The Making of Unfinished, Decomposing and Reassembled Clothes', Fashion Theory, Vol 2, issue 1, March, pp. 25–49. Gilman, Charlotte Perkins (1979), Herland, London: The Women's Press. Orig. publ. 1915. Goffman, Erving (1969), The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, London: Allen Lane. Goldman, A. (1974), Ladies and Gentlemen, Lenny Bruce, London: Panther. Greenberg, Clement (1982), Modernist Painting', in Frascina, Francis & Harrison, Charles (eds.). Gross, John (1969), The Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters: Aspects of English Literary Life Since 1800, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Gustafson, Robert (1982), ‘The Power of the Screen: The Influence of Edith Head's Film Designs on the Retail Fashion Market', The Velvet Light Trap: Review of Cinema, no 19. Hamilton, Mary Agnes ( 1936), 'Changes in Social Life', in Strachey, Ray (ed.). Hamilton, M. (1941), Women at Work, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Harte, Negley B. (ed.) (1991), Fabrics and Fashions: Studies in the Economic and Social History of Dress, London: Pasold Research Fund. Harvey, John (1995), Men in Black, London: Reaktion Books. Haweis, Mary Eliza (1878), The Art of Beauty, London: Chatto and Windus. Haye, Amy de la and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.) (1999), Defining Dress: Dress as Object, Meaning and Identity, Manchester: Manchester University Press. Haynes, Alan (1983), 'Murderous Millinery: The Struggle for the Plumage Act 1921', History Today, July. Heard, Gerald (1924), Narcissus: An Anatomy of Clothes, London: Kegan Paul. Hebdige, Dick (1979), Subculture: The Meaning of Style, London: Methuen. Hertzog, Charlotte & Gaines, Jane (1983), ‘Hollywood, costumes and the Fashion Industry', Triangle Cinema Programme, Birmingham, May. Hiler, Hilaire (1929), From Nudity to Raiment, London: Foyles. Hollander, Anne (1975), Seeing Through Clothes, New York: Avon Books. (1994) Sex and Suits: The Evolution of Modern Dress, New York: Alfred Knopf. Horkheimer, Max and Adorno, Theodor (1979), The Dialectic of Englightenment, London: Verso. Orig. publ. 1944. Howe, Bea (1967), Arbiter of Elegance, London: Harvill Press. Hower, Ralph M. (1946), History of Macy's of New York: 1858-1919, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Hughes, Douglas (ed.) (1970), Perspectives on Pornography, New York: Macmillan. Hume, Marion (1993), 'The New Mood', Independent on Sunday, Magazine Section, 16 May. Ironside, Janey (1973), Janey: An Autobiography, London: Michael Joseph. Jameson, Fredric (1981), The Political Unconscious: Narrative as Social Symbolic Act, London: Methuen. (1984), ‘Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Latge Capitalism', New Left Review, no 146, July/August. Jenkyns, Richard (1980), The Victorians and Ancient Greece, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Kandiyoti, Deniz and Saktanber, Ayse (eds.) (2001), Fragments of Culture: The Everyday of Modern Turkey, London: I.B.Tauris. Keenan, Brigid (1977), The Women We Wanted to Look Like, New York: St Martins Press. Keenan, William J. F. (ed.) (2001), Dressed to Impress: Looking the Part, Oxford: Berg. Khan, Naseem (1992), ‘Asian Women's Dress: From Burqah to Bloggs – Changing Clothes for Changing Times', in Ash, Juliet and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.). Kim, Sun Bok (1998), Is Fashion Art?', Fashion Theory, Vol 2, issue 1, March, pp. 51– 72. Kolbowski, Silvia (1984), '(Di)vested Interests: The Calvin Klein Ads', ZG, no 10, Spring. König, René (1973), The Restless Image, London: Allen and Unwin. Kunzle, David (1982), Fashion and Fetishism, Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield. Lang, Kurt and Lang, Gladys (1961), ‘Fashion: Identification and Differentiation in the Mass Society', in Roach, Mary Ellen and Eicher, Jane Bubolz (eds.). Lasch, Christopher (1979), The Culture of Narcissism, New York: Warner Books. Laver, James (1968), Dandies, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. (1969a), A Concise History of Costume, London: Thames and Hudson. (1969b), Modesty in Dress: An Inquiry into the Fundamentals of Fashion, London: Heinemann. Lee, Sarah Tomalin (1975), American Fashion, London: André Deutsch. Lehmann, Ulrich (1999), 'Tigersprung', Fashion Theory, Vol 3, issue 3, September, pp. 297–322. (2000), Tigersprung: Fashion in Modernity, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Lemire, Beverly (1997) Dress, Culture and Commerce: The English Clothing Trade Before the Factory, 1660-1800, Basingstoke: Macmillan. Leopold, Ellen (1992), 'The Manufacture of the Fashion System', in Ash, Juliet and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.). Lewis, Alfred and Woodworth, Constance (1973), Miss Elizabeth Arden, London: W. H. Allen. Lipovetsky, Gilles (1994), The Empire of Fashion: Dressing Modern Democracy, Princeton: Princeton University Press. Trans. Č. Porter. Lurie, Alison (1981), The Language of Clothes, London: Heinemann. MacInnes, Colin (1959), Absolute Beginners, London: Allison and Busby. McRobbie, Angela (1998), British Fashion Design: Rag Trade or Image Industry?, London: Routledge. Malcolm X (1965), The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Mallarmé, Stéphane (1933), La Dernière Mode, New York: Publications of the Institute of French Studies. Martin, Bernice (1981), A Sociology of Contemporary Cultural Change, Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Martin, Richard (1999), 'A Note: Art and Fashion, Viktor and Rolf, Fashion Theory, Vol 3, issue 1, March, pp. 109–121. Marx, Karl (1970), Capital, Vol I, London: Lawrence and Wishart. Trans. Orig. publ 1886. Melly, George (1972), Revolt into Style: The Pop Arts in Britain, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Michelson, Peter (1970), An Apology for Porn', in Hughes, Douglas (ed.). Miller, Michael (1981), The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Department Store 1869 – 1920, London: Allen & Unwin. Mitchell, Juliet & Oakley, Ann (eds.) (1976), The Rights and Wrongs of Women, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Mitford, Nancy (1974), The Best Novels of Nancy Mitford, London: Hamish Hamilton. Modleski, Tania (ed.) (1986), Studies in Entertainment: Critical Approaches to Mass Culture, Bloomington and Indiana: Indiana University Press. Moers, Ellen (1960), The Dandy: Brummell to Beerbohm, Londo: Secker & Warburg. Molloy, John T. (1977), The Women's Dress for Success Book, Chicago: Follet. Moore, Doris Langley (1949), The Woman in Fashion, London: Batsford. (1967), E. Nesbit: A Biography, London: Ernest Benn. Moretti, Franco (1983), Signs Taken for Wonders, London: Verso. Morgan, Robin (ed.) (1970), Sisterhood is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings from the Women's Liberation Movement, NewYork: Random House. Morris, Ivan (1964), The World of the Shining Prince, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Morton, A. L. (1952), The English Utopia, London: Lawrence and Wishart. Mukerji, Chandra (1983), From Graven Images: Patterns of Modern Materialism, New York: Columbia University Press. Navaro-Yashin, Yael (2001), ‘The Market for Identities: Secularism, Islamism, Commodities, in Kandiyoti & Saktanber (eds.). Nesbit, E. (1901), The Story of the Amulet, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Newton, Judith, Ryan, Mary P. & Walkowitz, Judith (1983), Sex and Class in Women's History, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Newton, Stella Mary (1974), Health Art and Reason: Dress Reformers of the Nineteenth Century, London: John Murray. (1975), Fashion in Fashion History', Times Literary Supplement, 21 March. (1976), 'Couture and Society', Times Literary Supplement, 12 November. Nystrom, Paul (1928), Economics of Fashion, New York: Ronald Press. Osborne, John (1982), A Better Class of Person: An Autobiography 1929–1956, Harmondsworth: Penguin. O'Sullivan, Sue (1982), Passionate Beginnings: Ideological Politics 1969–1982', Feminist Review, no 11. Palmer, Alexandra (1997), New Directions: Fashion History Studies in North America and England', Fashion Theory, Vol 1, issue 3, September, pp. 297–312. Parry, Alfred (1960), Garrets and Pretenders: A History of Bohemianism in America, New York: Dover Publications. Orig. publ. 1933. Phillips, Pearson (1963), 'The New Look', in Sissons, Michael & Philip French (eds.). Pinchbeck, Ivy (1981), Women Workers and the Industrial Revolution 1750–1850, London: Virago. Orig. publ. 1930. Poiret, Paul (1931), My First Fifty Years, London: Victor Gollancz. Polhemus, Ted (ed.) (1978), Social Aspects of the Human Body, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Proust, Marcel (1981), Remembrance of Things Past, Vols I, II and III, London: Chatto and Windus. Orig. publ. 1908–1925. Quant, Mary (1966), Quant by Quant, London: Cassell Radcliffe Richards, Janet (1980), The Sceptical Feminist, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Réage, Pauline (1954), The Story of O, Paris: Olympia Press. Rees, Goronwy (1969), St Michael: A History of Marks and Spencer, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Rhondda, Margaret Haig, Viscountess (1933), This Was My World, London: Macmillan. Ribeiro, Aileen (1988), Fashion in the French Revolution, New York: Holmes & Meier. (1995), The Art of Dress: Fashion in England and France 1750–1820, New Haven, CN: Yale University Press. Roach, Mary Ellen & Eicher, Jane Bubolz (1965). Dress, Adornment and the Social Order, New York: John Wiley. Roberts, Hélène (1977). 'The Exquisite Slave: The Role of Clothes in the Making of the Victorian Woman', Signs, Vol 2, no 3, Spring. Roberts, Michèle (1983). The Visitation, London: The Women's Press. Rowbotham, Sheila and Weeks, Jeffrey (1977). Socialism and the New Life: The Personal and Sexual Politics of Edward Carpenter and Havelock Ellis, London: Pluto Press. Rubinstein, Helena (1930). The Art of Feminine Beauty, London: Victor Gollancz. Runciman, Steven (1975), Byzantine Style and Civilisation, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Sampson, Kevin & Rimmer, David (1983), ‘The Ins and Outs of High Street Fashion', The Face, July. Sartre, Jean-Paul (1968), Being and Nothingness, London: Methuen. Saunders, Edith (1954), The Age of Worth, London: Longmans. Sennett, Richard (1974), The Fall of Public Man, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sévigné, Madame de (1982), Selected Letters, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Sherwood, James (2000), 'Great Minds Think Alike', Independent on Sunday, Reality Magazine Section. Shirazi, Fagheh (2000), 'Islamic Religion and Women's Dress Code', in Arthur, Linda B. (ed.), pp.113–130. Shulman, Nicola (2002), In Excess of Amorous Intentions', Times Literary Supplement, 24 May. Silverman, Debra (1986), Selling Culture: Bloomingdales, Diana Vreeland and the New Aristocracy of Taste in Reagan's America, New York: Pantheon Books. Silverman, Kaja (1986), ‘Fragments of a Fashionable Discourse', in Modleskia, Tania (ed.), pp. 139–152. Simmel, Georg (1971), On Individuality and Social Forms, Chicago: Chicago University Press. Orig. publ. 1904. Sissons, Michael & French, Philip (ed.) (1963), The Age of Austerity, 1945–1951, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Snitow, Ann, Stansell, Christine & Thompson, Sharon (eds.) (1984) Desire: The Politics of Sexuality, London: Virago. Sontag, Susan (1979), On Photography, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Spalding, Frances (1983), Vanessa Bell, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Squire, Geoffrey (1974), Dress, Art and Society 1560–1970, London: Studio Vista. Stanley, Liz (ed.) (1984), The Diaries of Hannah Cullwick, London: Virago. Stead, Christina (1974), A Little Tea, A Little Chat, London: Virago. Orig. publ. 1945. Stewart, Margaret & Hunter, Leslie (1964), The Needle is Threaded: The History of an Industry, London: Heinemann. Stimpfl, Joseph (2000), 'Veiling and Unveiling: Reconstructing Malay Female Identity in Singapore', in Arthur, Linda B. (ed.), pp. 169–182. Strachey, Ray (ed.) (1936), Our Freedom and its Results, London: Hogarth Press. Sudjic, Deyan (2001), 'Is the Future of Art in their Hands?', London Observer, review section, 14 October. Tanner, Tony (1979), Adultery and the Novel, Baltimore: John Hopkins Press. Tarrant, Naomi (1994), The Development of Costume, Edinburgh: National Museums of Scotland in conjunction with Routledge. Taylor, Barbara (1983a), ‘“The Men are as Bad as their Masters" .. Socialism, Feminism and Sexual Antagonism in the London Tailoring Trade of the 1830s', in Newton, Ryan and Walkowitz (eds.). (1983b), Eve and the New Jerusalem, London: Virago. Taylor, Lou (1983), Mourning Dress: A Costume and Social History, London: Allen & Unwin. (1998), 'Doing the Laundry? A Reassessment of Object-based Dress History', Fashion Theory, Methodology Special Issue, Vol 2, issue 4, December, pp. 337–358. (1999), 'Wool, Cloth and Gender: The Use of Woollen Cloth in Women's Dress in Britain, 1865–85’, in Haye, Amy de la and Wilson, Elizabeth (eds.), pp. 30–47. (2002), The Study of Dress History, Manchester: Manchester University Press. Thompson, E. P. (1968), The Making of the English Working Class, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Tinling, Teddy (1983), Sixty Years in Tennis, London: Sidgwick and Jackson. Turim, Maureen (1983), Fashion Shapes: Film, the Fashion Industry and the Image of Women', Socialist Review, no. 71 (Vol 13, no 5). Turner, Bryan (1982),'The Discourse of Diet', Theory, Culture and Society, Vol 1, no 1, Spring. Veblen, Thorstein (1957), The Theory of the Leisure Class, London: Allen and Unwin. Orig. publ. 1899. Vine, Sarah (2001), Naked Ambition', London Evening Standard, 28 February. Walter, Aubrey (ed.) (1982), Come Together: The Years of Gay Liberation 1970–1973, London: Gay Men's Press. Warhol, Andy & Hackett, Pat (1980), POPism: The Warhol '60s, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Warwick, Alexandra & Cavallaro, Dani (1998), Fashioning the Frame: Boundaries, Dress and the Body, Oxford: Berg. Waugh, Evelyn (1928), Decline and Fall, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Weeks, Jeffrey (1977), Coming Out, London: Quartet. Werskey, Gary (1978), The Visible College: A collective Biography of British Scientists of the 1930s, London: Allen Lane. West, Jackie (ed.) (1982), Work, Women and the Labour Market, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Wharton, Edith (1952), The House of Mirth, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Orig. publ. 1905. White, Doris (1980), D for Doris, V for Victory, Milton Keynes: Oaklead Books. Williams, Zoe (2001), 'Do My Nipples Look Big in This?', London Evening Standard, 28 February. Wilson, Elizabeth (1982), 'If You're So Sure You're a Feminist, Why Do You Read the Fashion Page?' London Guardian, 26 July Wood, Neal (1959), Communism and British Intellectuals, London: Victor Gollancz. Wortley Montagu, Lady Mary (1997), Selected Letters, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Zeldin, Theodor (1977), France 1848-1945: Taste and Corruption, Oxford: Oxford University Press. ## Index Page references in italics refer to illustrations Absolute Beginners (MacInnes), 190 Ackroyd, Peter, 121–2 acrylic, 71 addiction to fashion, 228–9 Adorno, Theodor, 52, 64, 244 Adrian, 139, 140, 170, 171 aerobics style, 142–3 aesthetic of the ugly, 127–33, 189 see also ugliness 86, 88, 89, 90, 245, 246–7 air hostess uniforms, 38 African styles, 199, 200 ambivalence to fashion, 224, 229–30, 244, 246 Agate, The (Southall), 216 Amulet, The (Nesbit), 225 Ancient Greeks, 16, 17, 19, 210 Anderson, Elizabeth Garrett, 224 Anderson, Perry, 63 And God Created Woman, 112 anonymity of crowds, 26, 135–7 animals, cruelty to, 221-2 androgyny, 106, 120, 121, 121–2, art history, 48–9 anthropological explanations of fashion, 8, 54–7 Anthony, Katherine, 216 200,201, 203 see also bisexuality anti-fashion, 183, 184 Anton, 58 Appadurai, Arjun, 256 Aquascutum, 160 Ascot, 165 asceticism, 18, 21 Arden, Elizabeth, 103, 109, 110 Arlen, Michael, 43 Asian factories, 85–6 Arletty, 100 Ashley, Iris, 174 Armstrong Jones, Antony, 46 authentic and modernist division, 231-2, 246 art and fashion, 9, 47, 48–9, 60–6, Astor, Mary, 143 Bainbridge of Newcastle, 146, 147 Balenciaga, 88, 89, 174 ballroom dancing, 166, 168 ballerina look, 100 Ballin, Ada, 213 Balmain, Pierre, 100 Balzac, Honoré de, 134, 138, 182 Bangladesh, 85 Banks, Jeff, 154 Banner, Lois, 243 Banting, Charles, 115 Bara, Theda, 169, 170, 177 Bardot, Brigitte, 100, 112, 171-2, 192 bare back dresses, 92, 92 Barlee, Ellen, 156 Barnes, Djuna, 184, 185 Barney, Natalie Clifford, 164 Barran, John, 74 Barthes, Roland, 57–8 Bassey, Shirley, 199 Baudelaire, Charles, 127, 128, 136, 183 Baudrillard, Jean, 47, 53–4, 91, 95 Bazaar, 152, 175 beatniks, 186 Beaton, Cecil, 39, 89, 126, 168, 228 beauty, standards of, 91, 115, 116 Beauvoir, Simone de, 100, 125–6, 186 Belgium, 84 Bell, The (Murdoch), 186 Bell, Quentin, 49, 57 Bell, Vanessa, 185 Bender, Lee, 194 Benjamin, Walter, 64, 128, 204, 276 Bennett, Arnold, 78 Bérard, Christian, 229 Bergdorf Goodman, 153 Bertin, Célia, 88 Berñal, J. D., 221 Bergler, Edmund, 94 Bertin, Rose, 30, 32 Bevan, Aneurin, 222 Biba, 114, 153, 177, 192–3, 240 Black, Clementina, 76, 78 bisexuality, 118, 119, 120, 201 see also androgyny black people, 109-10, 198-200 birds, cruelty to, 221–2, 222 Black Muslims, 199 Bland, Hubert, 216 34, 35, 122–3, 137; mourning ritual, 187, 188; rise of, 22, 24; values of, 30; women's role, 50, 118, 122-3 black clothing, 186–9 Bloomer, Amelia, 209, 210 Boy George, 196–7, 201 bloomer costume, 162, 209 Bloomingdale's, 147 blouse makers, 78 Bowie, David, 196, 200 boutiques, 152–3, 175 Braudel, Fernand, 16, 156 blousons noirs, 189 Bretonne, Restif de la, 97 Boussac, Marcel, 88 Breward, Christopher, 272 Blue, Adrianne, 237 Boswell, James, 137 Board of Trade, 76, 80 Boucicault, Henri, 150 body, attitudes towards, 2–3, 21, 169, 219, 221 Bonnie and Clyde, 172 Boulting, Ingrid, 177 Bon Marché, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150 Brideshead Revisited (Waugh), 172 bourgeoisie: anti-bourgeois dress, 183, 184, 186, 216; department stores and, 149, 150; fashions, 33, bras, 104, 106 bra-burning, 230 Brassai, Henri, 164 body decoration, 2, 3, 5, 55 bondage of elegance (in writings of de Beauvoir), 100, 125–6 bohemians, 184–6 Bolsheviks, 204, 205 British Guild of Creative Designers, 225 boiler suits, 240, 241, 242 British Home Stores, 152 Broadway Melody of 1936, 170 Brook Farm community, 208 Britain: classic styles, 173; dress reform, 209, 210, 216, 222, 225– $\begin{array} { r } { \boldsymbol { 6 } ; \mathbf { \sigma } } \end{array}$ fashion industry, 67–70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 79, 80–4, 86, 89, 90; feminism, 230, 235; history of fashion, 24, 26, 27, 28, 28, 30, 30, 34, 35, 36, 40; ladies suits, 140; oppositional dress, 179–82, 184, 185, 189–91, 193–4, 195–7, 199– 200, 201; shops, 144, 146, 147, 152, 153; youth cults and, 174 see also London Brookner, Anita, 242, 243 Brooks, David, 251–2 Brooks, Louise, 169 Brooks, Romaine, 164 Brownmiller, Susan, 232 Brummel, Beau, 180, 183, 229 Bull, Rev. G. S, 156 Bullock's department store, 124 Burberry, 159, 160 Burckhardt, Jacob, 26 Burgundy, Count of, 20 Burton, Montagu, 79 Burton tailoring group, 153 Bus Stop, 153, 194 Byron, Ġeorge Gordon, Lord, 36, 115, 181-3 Byzantium, 17–18 ## Index calicoes, Indian, 68 California, 80 camp styles, 194 Canada, 163 capitalism: beginnings of, 22; change and, 27, 60, 183; consumerism and, 49, 54; fashion and, 9, 13, 14, 33, 49, 203; industrial revolution and, 26, 27, 60; modernity and, 63; socialism and, 208, 220 cardigans, 5 Cardīn, Pierre, 176, 191 career woman's clothes, 140 Carlyle, Thomas, 55 Carol, Martine, 100 Caroline Chérie, 100 Carpenter, Edward, 218, 243 Carroll, Lewis, 1 Carter, Angela, 106, 107, 243 Carter, Ernestine, 174 Casque D'Or, 100 Castle, Irene, 167–8 Castle, Vernon, 167–8 casual dress see informal dress censorship, 92 Cazalis, Anne-Marie, 187 chain stores, 152, 153–4 Chanel, Gabrielle, 5, 38–9, 44, 46, 63, 89, 139, 158, 168, 169–70, 184, 191 change, fashion as, 3, 6 Changing with the Times (Fougasse), 6 Charles-Roux, Edmonde, 38 chauffeur uniforms, 36 Chelsea, 175, 185, 186, 194 Cheyne, George, 114–15 Chicago, 150 Childe Harolde (Byron), 183 children: clothes for, 61; exploitation of, 67, 70, 85 China, 14, 16 Christianity, 9, 18, 21, 108, 169, 235 cinema see films circular blade rotary cutter, 80 cities/city life: aesthetic of the ugly, 127–8, 130; anonymity of crowds in, 26, 135–7; decentralization of, 154; fashion and, 3, 9–10, 26, 27, 30, 133, 134–54, 156, 189; individualism in, 26, 138; mobility, 27; modernism and, 10, 141, 143; New York as example of, 134, 139–43; post-modernism and, 141; shops and shopping, 144–54; standardization, 35; street dress (19th century), 136–7; use of black clothes in, 189 Civilization and Capitalism: The Structures of Everyday Life (Braudel), 16 Clark, Ossie, 174 class: dress related to, 19, 22–3, 24, 226; oppositional dress and, 190, 197 see also bourgeoisie; working class classical period see Greeks; Romans classic chic, 173 Cobbe, Frances Power, 123 coat and skirt style, 37, 78 clone look, 202 Cochrane, Molly, 225 Cocteau, Jean, 229 Coddington, Grace, 177 codpiece, 21 combinations (body suits), 214 combinations (early trades unions), 72 communitarian settlements, 208–9 Community Care, 224 complete garment method, 74, 79 Condition of the Working Class in England, The (Engels), 67 conks, 199 Connecticut, 80 conspicuous waste, 50–2 see also consumerism Constantinople, 18 constriction of the body see corsets constructivists, 205, 206 consumerism, 49, 53–4, 142, 171, 185, 193, 244–5 see also conspicuous waste contraceptive pill, 106 contradictory nature of fashion, 5, 6 see also irrationality of fashion Coote, Anna, 241 corsets, 38, 97–9, 99, 104, 106 cosmetics, 90, 95, 107–14, 192; conformity and, 112, 114; democracy and, 111-12; cosmetics (cont) emancipation and, 110–11; history of, 108–14; moral ambiguity of, 107–8; natural ingredients in, 192 costume books, 20 cotton industry, 67–8, 68, 71 Countdown, 153 counter-cultural fashions see oppositional dress Country Life, 87 Courrèges, André, 165, 166, 175–6 Courtaulds, 70, 71 couturiers, 30, 32, 63, 87, 88 see also name of couturier craftsmen, 22 Craigie, Jill, 225–6 Crane, Walter, 216 Crashaw, Richard, 117 Crawford, Joan, 143, 171 Cretan culture, 21 crinolines, 33, 34, 229 Cripps, Sir Stafford, 80, 225 crowds, anonymity of, 26, 135–7 cruelty to animals and birds, 221–2 Cullwick, Hannah, 157 Culture Club, 201 Cunard, Nancy, 43, 56 Cunnington, Čecil Willett, 48, 102, 107 Cunnington, Phillis, 102 cutting process, 74, 80, 84, 85 Daily Express, 174 dancing, 166–9 dandyišm, 29, 179–84, 186, 200, 231 Darrieux, Danielle, 100 Darwin, Charles, 55 Davies, Emily, 99 Defoe, Daniel, 23, 220 Delaunay, Sonia, 63 demi-monde, 32–3, 138, 176 democracy: fashion seen as democratic, 12, 111–12, 178, 204, 218-19 department stores, 76, 77, 144–52, 153, 154; boutiques within, 153; clientele, 148, 150; decline of, 152, 154; dressmakers in, 76, 77; history of, 144–7, 152; shop assistants, 147–8, 150 Derby, Jane, 39 Deréta, 44, 79 Dickens, Charles, 2, 108, 127, 135, 182 dieting, 114–15 Dioclētian, Emperor, 17 Dior, Christian, 43, 46, 87, 88, 100, 229 display, dress as, 155–6 Dobbs, J., 79 Dombey and Son (Dickens), 108–9 domestic servants, 23, 36 Dorelia, 185 Douglas, Mary, 132 draped garments, 17, 21 dreadlocks, 199–200 dress designers see couturiers Dressed To Kill, 143 dressmakers, 72–3, 79, 156, 170 dress reform, 208–27; communitarian settlements and, 208–9; cruelty to animals and birds in relation to, 221–2; democratic ideals and, 218–19; feminists and, 209, 224– 5, 227; health and, 212, 214; informal dress, 222, 224, 227; nature and, 210, 212; New Look and, 225, 226, 227; pre-Raphaelites and, 209–10, 214; socialists and, 208, 216, 218, 220–1; utopian ideas and, 219, 220–1, 224–5 Dress Reform Society, 99 Duchamp, Marcel, 195 Dunaway, Faye, 172 Duncan, Isadora, 166 dungarees, 240, 241, 242 dyes, 213, 214 East India Company, 68 Eastman straightknife, 80 economic explanations of fashion, 49–54 see also trade Eden, Anthony, 189 Edward VIII, 43 effeminacy, 107, 165, 180 Egypt, 108 eighteenth century: city life, 137, 144; clothing industry, 68, 70, 72, ## Index eighteenth century: city life (cont) 74; dance, 166; diets, 114–15; domestic servants, 23, 36; fashion, 23, 27, 36, 117, 156, 160, 166, 170, 179, 180; homosexuality, 30; Industrial Revolution, 22, 27; revolutionary upheavals, 180–2; Romantic movement, 61; uniforms, 35; woman's role, 118 elegance, bondage of (in writings of de Beauvoir), 100, 125–6 Elizabeth I, Queen, 24 Elizabeth II, Queen, 226 Ellis, Havelock, 55, 97 Engels, Friedrich, 67, 73, 135, 208 England see Britain Entwistle, Jo, 265 eroticism, 91–116, 136; cosmetics, 107–14; crowds and, 136; feminist views, 98, 100; fetishism, 94, 95– 8, 101; Laver's theory of shifting erogenous zones, 92; pornography, 100, 101; problems of explaining fashion in sexual terms, 91–2; psychoanalytic explanations, 94; slimness, 114–16; underwear, 102–7 slimness, 114–16; underwear, 102–7 ethnic look, 193 ethnic minorities, 198–200 eugenics, 111, 219, 220 Eugénie, Empress, 32 European fashions see history of fashion; names of countries Eurhythmics, The, 208 Ewen, Stuart and Elizabeth, 53, 204, 245 Evans, Caroline, 266, 269 Executive Style (Fiedorek), 140 existentialism, dress and, 186–7, 189 explanations of fashions, 8-9, 10–12, 47–66; as art form, 9, 47, 48, 60– 6; as cultural barometer, 47; as sign language, 57–8; from anthropological viewpoint, 8, 54–7; from economic viewpoint, 49-54; from psychological viewpoint, 8, 9, 11–12, 58–60; pluralist position, 11 exploitation of workers, 12, 14, 67, 70, 72–3, 74, 74, 76–7, 78, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88–9, 235 Face, The, 132, 197 factories, 67, 70, 72, 74, 76, 79, 80, 83, 85, 86 fantasy, 246 fascism, 187, 189, 204, 220 fashion dolls, 32 fashion industry, 13–14, 67–88, 235; cotton industry, 67–8, 68, 71; decline, 83; exploitation of workers, 14, 67, 70, 72–3, 74, 74, 76–7, 78, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88–9, 235; haute couture, 70, 86– 90; mass production, 73–4, 76–86, 89; silk industry, 68, 70–1; strikes, 77; synthetic fibres, 71; tailors, 72, 74, 76; third world labour, 14, 84– 6; trade unions, 72, 74, 83, 84, 86; wool industry, 68, 70, 71 fashion photography, 44, 46, 116, 157-8 feminism/feminist views: ambivalence about fashion, 224, 229–30, 244, 245–6; consumerism and feminist view of fashion, 244–5; different ways of understanding culture within feminism, 65–6, 230; eroticism and, 98, 100; exploitation in clothing industry, 76, 235; fashion experienced as addiction, 228–9; fashion experienced as bondage, 66, 100 228 see also bondage of elegance; fashion seen as art, 245, 246–7; fashion seen as functional, 234; gender and sexuality, 120, 121; ideas about alternative fashion, 240, 241, 242; ideas about the 'natural', 234–5; ideology of individualism and free choice, 237; mass media, 230; political subordination and fashion, 13; popular culture, 65–6, 230; self righteous attitudes to dress, 236; styles of dress associated with feminism, 240–3; tension between authenticity and modernism in feminist debate, 231–4; utopian ideas of dress, 224–5 Femininity (Brownmiller), 232 fetishism, 94, 95–9, 101, 136 Feuillère, Edwige, 100 Fewillet, Madame Octave, 33 Fiedorek, Mary, 140 fifteenth century, 18, 20, 118 Fifth Avenue Walking Dress, 34 Fifty Shilling Tailors, 79 films, 92, 100, 103–4, 143–4, 169– 72, 178 see also Hollywood Fitzgibbon, Theodora, 164, 186 Flaubert, Gustave, 96 Flemish art, 22 Flugel, J. C., 94, 218–19 Foale, Marion, 174 Foot, Michael, 226 football chic, 197 For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign (Baudrillard), 47, 91 Foster, John, 67 Fougasse, 6 fourteenth century, 16, 18–20, 22 Germany, 71, 118, 214, 216 France: 4, 34, 73, 84, 144 see also Paris; dress reform, 209; films, 100; mourning clothes, 188; Nazi occupation, 44; nineteenth century, 32, 50; oppositional dress 180, 182, 184; seventeenth century, 6, 119, 156; silk/silk industry, 68, 70, 71 Frankfurt School, 64, 204, 244, 245 French silks, 68, 71 Freud, Sigmund, 11, 95, 120–1 Frith, Simon, 191 functional view of fashion, 49–50, 54–5, 58, 165, 234 see also utilitarianism fustian, 68 futurists, 204 Gable, Clark, 29 Gaultier, Jean Paul, 10, 132–3 Gay Liberation (GLF), 201-2 Gibson, Charles Dana, 78 gender, 13, 29, 30, 117–22, 201, 202, 203; androgyny, 120, 121, 121–2; sexual differences in dress examined, 28, 30, 117–20; sexuality in relation to, 120–1, 201, 202, 203 see also sexual identity George, Dorothy, 70 Gibson girl, 78, 157 Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 224 girdles, 104, 106 Gish, Lillian, 169 Givenchy, 174 Glass of Éashion (Beaton), 228 Glyn, Elinor, 103 Godwin, E. W., 210 Goldsmiths College, London, 174 Gordon, Lady Duff, 103 Grable, Betty, 172 Grant, Cary, 29 Greco, Juliette, 187 Green, Alexander Plunket, 174, 175 Greenwich Village, 184–5, 201 group styles, 154 see also oppositional drêss Guardian, 84, 88, 174, 236, 241 Guermantes Way, The (Proust), 134 guilds, 72 Gulliver's Travels (Swift), 220 hair styles as oppositional fashion, 199-200 Hall, Radclyffe, 164 Hall, Stuart, 155 Hardie, Keir, 222 Harella, 79 Harlem, 109, 110, 168, 198, 200 Harlow, Jean, 177–8 Harman, Harriet, 227 Harpers and Queen, 10 Harrison, Rex, 4 Harrods, 152 haute couture, 48, 50, 63, 70, 86–90, 101, 165, 172, 173, 174, 205, 226 see also couturiers; names of couturiers Haweis, Mary Eliza, 210, 214, 228 Hays code, 92 Hazlitt, William, 181 health and dress reform, 212–14 Heard, Gerald, 221 Hebdige, David, 197 Hemingway, Ernest, 39 Hepburn, Audrey, 187 Hepworths, 84, 153 Herland (Gilman),224 ## Index Hicks, Frances, 76 high art, 48, 60, 63, 64 high heeled shoes, 100 Highland dress, 179 hippies, 130, 192–5, 231 historical costumes, 170 history of fashion, 16-46 see also Ancient Greeks; Romans; twelfth century; fourteenth century; fifteenth century; sixteenth century; seventeenth century; eighteenth century; nineteenth century; twentieth century Hitchcock, W. & Ćo., 146 Hollander, Anne, 165, 170 Hollywood, 92, 126, 127, 169–71 homeworkers, 82, 83 see also outworkers homosexuality, 30, 94, 183, 201–2 Hong Kong, 82, 85 Hopkins, Miriam, 171 Horkheimer, Max, 64 Horst, 46 hose, 17, 20 House of Mirth, The, (Wharton), 103 Hower, Ralph, 146 Hulanicki, Barbara, 192 Huxley, Aldous, 43 identity, 11–12, 122–33, 155–6; aesthetic of the ugly, 127–33; appearance related to identity in 19th and 20th century ideas, 11-12, 122–5, 155–6; bondage of elegance described by de Beauvoir, 125–6; Hollywood ideals, 126-7; naturalism, 127–8, 130, 131 see also gender; sexual identity Illustrated London News, 144 immigrants, 74, 76, 78, 80 import controls, 84 Incroyables, 180, 182 India, 67, 68 individualism, 12, 26, 138, 203, 237 Indonesia, 85, 86 Industrial Revolution, 22, 26, 27, 60, 67, 68, 70, 155, 156 informal dress, 222, 224, 227, 243 International Health Exhibition (1884), 213 Iribe, Paul, 41 Irish traditional dress, 179 Ironside, Janey, 174, 176, 185 irrationality of fashion, 4, 6, 9, 49, 57,92, 94 Italy/Italians, 26, 71, 78, 84, 89 Jacobson, Ili, 174 Jaegar, Dr Gustav, 213, 234 Jagger, Mick, 165 James I, King, 24 Jameson, Fredric, 141, 205 Japan, 16, 71, 85, 96 jazz, 168, 169 jeans, 165, 183, 184, 243 see also trousers Jewel in the Crown, The, 172 Jews, 74, 76 John, Augustus, 185 Jones, Maurice, 241 Judaeo-Christian cultures, 9, 18, 169 see also Christianity Jules et Jim, 172 Justinian, Emperor, 18 Kansas, 80 Keeler, Christine, 176 Kendal Milne, 146 Khan, Emmanuelle, 174 King, Billie Jean, 56 Klein, Calvin, 106 kleptomania see shoplifting Komsomol'skaya Pravda, 205 König, René, 58 Kunzle, David, 97, 99, 166 Lacoste, 197 La Dernière Mode, 62 La Donna della Finestra (Rossetti), 128 La France Elégante (1857), 118 Langlée, Monsieur, 30 Lanvin, Jeanne, 88 La Ronde, 100 Lartigue, J. H., 158 Lasch, Christopher, 53, 142, 245 Laura Ashley clothes, 194, 240 Laver, James, 27, 44, 92, 103, 158 laws about clothing, 24 learned professions, dress for, 22 Lebigot, Marie, 104 Mainbocher, 43 Le Corbusier, 141 make-up see cosmetics Leeds, 74 Malcolm X, 198–9 leisure wear, 141–2, 171 Lelong, Lucien, 4 male dress see men Le Monocle club, 164 Mallarmé, Stéphane, 62 Lenglen, Suzanne, 160, 160–2 Malevich, K., 205 Manchester, 68, 85, 146, 152 Lenñox, Annie, 208 Manea Fen community, 209 lesbians, 110, 128, 164, 202, 240, 241 Man of the Crowd, The (Poe), 135 Les Dessous Elégants, 102 Marbury, Elisabeth, 110 Les Enfants du Paradis, 100 Les Grandes Manoeuvres, 100 Marie Antoinette, 32 Marie Antoinette (film), 170 Letty Lynton dress, 171 Market Harborough, 74 Levitt, Dorothy, 160 Marks, Michael, 152 Liberty's, 192,210, 214, 214 Marks and Spencer, 149, 152, 153 Lindy Hop, 168 lingerie see underwear Marshall, Frānces, 189 Lipovetsky, Gilles, 252 Listener, 36 Marshall and Snelgrove, 152 Littlewoods, 152 London: changing character of, 141; Engels' description of, 135; fashion industry, 73, 74, 76, 77, 82, 83; International Health Exhibition (1884), 213; oppositional dress, 183, 185, 189, 195, 200; shops, 144, 146, 150, 152, 153, 154, 175 see also name of shop; youth cult and, 174 London Řeview of Books, 243 London Tailoresses' Union, 76 Marshall Fields, 150, 152 Los Angeles, 124, 126, 198 Louis XIV, 30 Loumarin, Baronne de, 62 Lucile, 103, 185 Luna, Donyale, 199 Lurie, Alison, 57 Lycra, 71, 104 Lyons, 70 Lytton, Edward Bulwer, 186 Marxist views, 52, 53, 54, 63, 64, 208 Macaronis, 180 McCardell, Claire, 39 MacInnes, Colin, 190 Macmillan, Harold, 5, 176 Macy's, 146, 147, 150 Madame Bovary (Flaubert), 96–7 Madame de, 100 madame shops, 76 magic and fashion, 56 maid servants, 23, 36 masculinity: dandyism and, 179, 180; homosexuals and, 202; in women's clothes, 118, 120, 136, 140 Mary, Queen, 90 mass production, 8, 30, 38; Chanel designs adapted for, 39; different views of mass fashion, 178; exclusive clothing and, 32, 48, 90; fashion made accessible to the majority, 12, 89; historical background, 73–4, 76–86, 89; Hollywood influence on, 171; sewing machines and, 54, 73–4; sizing and, 124; underwear and, 103; uniforms and, 35; youth cult and, 174 mating cycles, 95 Melly, George, 175, 191, 204 men: diet, 115; dress reform, 218; fashions, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 27–9, 30, 33, 50, 158; compared with female dress, 117–20 see also uniforms; influence on fashion, 94; men's wear firms, 79; oppositional dress, 66, 179–84, 189–91, 194, 196, 197, 198–9, 200–2; seen as oppressors of women, 121, 231; third world, 14 see also homosexuality Menkes, Šuzy, 203 Men's Dress Reform Party, 218 ## Index merchant class, 22 Merveilleuses, 182 Messel, Oliver, 170 Metternich, Princess Pauline, 32 Mexicans, 198 Meyer, Baron de, 158 military uniforms, 35, 36, 38, 44, 80 milk girls, 22 Millais, John, 209 Milton, John, 26 Mitford, Nancy, 164 modernism/modernity: as art movement, 62–3; authentic/ modernist division, 231, 246; cities and, 141, 143; dance and, 168, 169; discussion of concept of, 63; fashion as part of, 60, 63, 155, 195, 231, 246; identity as problem in, 11–12; movement as feature of, 116, 165; westernization as sign of, 14 modesty and fashion, 54, 55, 94 mods, 191–2, 193 Moers, Ellen, 183 Molloy, John T., 140 Mondrian, Piet, 176 Montgomery Ward, 152 Moore, Doris Langley, 48, 49 morality: cosmetics and, 107-8; dress and, 6, 8, 57, 234, 246; Edwardian, 103 More, Thomas, 220 Moreau, Jeanne, 172 Morgan, Anne, 110 Morning Star, 241 Morris, Jane, 209 Morris, William, 216, 220 Morton, Digby, 80 Moses, Robert, 141 motoring wear, 159, 160 mourning clothes, 187–8 movement, 116, 165 Mukerji, Chandra, 54 Murdoch, Iris, 186 museums of costume, feelings evoked by, 1 music, 65 My Fair Lady, 5 Nana, 100 Napoleon I, 35 Napoleon III, 32 narcissism, 142, 143, 180, 183, 191 Narcissus: An Anatomy of Clothes (Heard), 221 national costume, 23 National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers (NUTGW), 83, 84 nature/naturalism: city dwellers and, 127–8; dress reform and, 210, 213; feminism and, 231, 234–5; hippies and, 130, 192, 194–5; 1960s style and, 112, 114, 130; Romantics and, 61, 108; tan as sign of, 131 Nazis, 44, 204 needs in relation to fashion see functional view of fashion Nesbit, E., 216, 225 Newcastle, 146, 147 New Harmony community, 209 New Jersey, 80, 154 New Look, 43, 44, 44, 46, 47, 100, 101, 104, 225, 226, 227 New Society, 243 New Statesman and Nation, 225 Newton, Stella Mary, 16, 17, 213, 218 New York: as example of twentieth century city, 134, 139–43; clothing industry, 77, 78, 79–80; cosmetics, 109, 110; fashions, 34, 78, 139–41, 142; popular culture, 177; shops, 146, 147, 153 see also name of shop New York Herald Tribune, 140 Next, 153 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 27 Nigger Heaven (Van Vechten), 109– 110 nineteenth century: city life, 127–8, 134–7, 138, 141, 144–52; corsets, 97, 98, 98; cosmetics, 108–9, 127; dance, 166; diets, 115; dress reform, 208–14, 216; fashion, 5, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32–3, 34, 35– 6, 38, 119–20, 122–3, 128, 128, 155–7, 160, 162, 163; fashion industry, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 74, 76, 86; films set in, 100; nineteenth century: city life (cont) mourning clothes, 187–8; oppositional dress, 179–83, 184; popular culture, 155–7, 160, 160, 162, 163, 166; realist artists, 61–2; Romantic movement, 61; shops, 144–52; sport, 160, 160, 162; underwear, 102; uniforms, 35–6; woman's role, 28, 122–3 Notes on Deconstructing the popular, (Hall), 155 Nuremberg rally, 204 nylon, 71 Observer, 132, 229 Olivia, 100 Oneida community, 209 oppositional dress, 12–13, 154, 179– 207, 231; androgynous dress, 200–1, 203; black clothing, 186–9; bohemians, 184–6; constructivists, 205, 206; dandyism, 179–84, 186, 200, 231; dominant ideologies challenged by, 204–5; ethnic minorities, 198–200; existentialism, 186–7, 189; football chic, 197; Gay Liberation, 201–2; hippies, 192–5, 231; mods, 191–2, 193; political rebellion, 179, 181, 199; punk 195–6, 197, 231; reasons for, 203; teds, 189–90, 191; variety of 1980s styles, 196–7; zoot suits, 198-9 Orwell, George, 226, 243 Osborne, John, 111 outworkers, 72, 76, 79, 82, 83 overweight, 104, 114–16 Owenite communities, 208–9 Oz, 200 Palaeolithic period, 17 Palma, Brian de, 143 Pankhurst, Emmeline, 224 Paris, 35, 141; as capital of 19th century', 134–5; fashion and fashion designers, 10, 29, 32–3, 43, 44, 63, 70, 86–7, 104, 109, 165, 171, 174, 188, 193 see also name of designer; lesbians, 128, 164; mass market and, 89, 90; oppositional dress, 186; underwear, 102 parody, fashion as, 10 passivity, 120 pastiche, 172–3, 177 paternalism, 149 Patou, Jean, 39, 162, 218 patriarchal forms, 86 peasant costume, 23 Pelham (Lytton), 186 Penn, Irving, 46 Penney, J. Č. & Co., 152 Pergola night club, 187 períod clothes, 172, 176, 210 see also historical costumes personality types, 124–5 Philippines, 86 photography, 44, 46, 116, 157–8 Piaggi, Anna, 229 pirating, 87 Poe, Edgar Allen, 135 Poiret, Paul, 38, 41, 86–7, 104, 139, 216, 229 political rebellion and dress, 179, 181, 199 politics, aestheticization of, 204 politics of fashion see feminism polyester, 71 polytechnic dressing, 242–3 pop music, 65 Popova, Liubov, 206 popular art, 48, 60 see also popular culture popular culture: and fashion, 154, 155–78; adoption of trousers by women, 162–6; developments since 1960s, 172–8; effect of cinema on, 169–72; effect of dance on, 166–9; effect of modern industrial life, 155–7; effect of photography, 157–8; effect of sport, 160–2, 166; effect of television, 172; views about, 63–6, 230 pornography, 100, 101, 232 postmodernism, 10, 11, 63, 141, 204, 205 Powell, Eleanor, 170 Preppy style, 173 ## Index pre-Raphaelites, 128, 128-30, 184, 209-10, 214 Price, Anne, 87 primitive' societies, 54–5, 56 Þrinciples, 153 Profumo affair, 176 prostitution, 73, 77, 86, 149 Proust, Marcel, 134, 136, 138, 228 psychological explanations of fashion, 8, 9, 11-12, 58–60, 94 Punch, 209, 230 punks, 131–2, 133, 195–6, 197, 231 Puritans, English, 24, 26, 54 Pursuit of Love, The (Mitford), 164 Quadrophenia, 196 Quant, Mary, 82, 89, 114, 152, 174–5, 176, 177, 186 Queen, 174 Rabanne, Paco, 176, 177 racism, 197, 198 Radcliffe Richards, Janet, 234 Ragged Robin clothes, 232 railway uniforms, 36 Rastafarians, 199–200 Rational Dress Society, 213 rayon, 71 Reactionary Chic (York), 179 realist art, 61–2 Rebirth of Venus, 238–9 Redferns, 34, 38 Regent Street, 144, 144–5, 152 Reger, Janet, 106 Renaud, Madeleine, 100 Rendlesham, Clare, 174 restaurants, 150 retro-chic, 5, 172 Rhondda, Lady, 163 Riefenstahl, Leni, 204 Rimmer, David, 197 ritual in relation to fashion, 56 Roberts, Hélène, 97, 99 Roberts, Michèle, 130 Robinson Crusoe (Defoe), 220 Rochas, Marcel, 100 Romans, 16, 17, 18, 20–21, 108 186, 234 see also romanticism romanticism, 27, 43, 44, 100, 101, 197 see also Romantics Romantics, 40, 61, 108, 182, 183, Rome, 17 Romeo and Juliet, 170 Rosier, Michel, 174 Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, 128 Royal College of Art, London, 174 Rubenstein, Helena, 109, 110–11, 115 Ruskin, John, 214 Ryan, Betty, 99 St Louis, 80 Samedi Soir, 187 Sampson, Kevin, 197 sandals, 216 Sartre, Jean Paul, 132, 186 Scargill, Arthur, 241 scientific breeding see eugenics Schiaperelli, Elsa, 43, 63, 171, 186 Scotland, 179 see also Britain Sears Roebuck, 152 secondhand clothing markets, feelings evoked by, 2 Second Sex, The (de Beauvoir), 100 Selfridge, Harry Gordon, 150, 152 Selfridges, 152, 153 Sensible Dress Society, 218 seventeenth century, 6, 23, 24, 68, 70, 72, 117, 118, 119, 156 Sévigné, Madame de, 6, 30 sewing machines, 54, 73 sexism, 230 sexual identity, 179, 201 see also gender sexuality: city life and, 128; sense of guilt about, 21; social workers and, 224; see also eroticism; gender Shaw, George Bernard, 214 Shearer, Norma, 170 shifting erogenous zone theory, 92 shoes, high heeled, 100 shoplifting, 150, 177 see also kleptomania shops, 144–54 shop workers, 147–8, 150 Siddal, Elizabeth, 209 Sieff, Lord, 152 sign language, fashion as, 57–8 Signoret, Simone, 100 Sikhs, 200 silent movies, 169 silk/silk industry, 68, 70–1 Simmel, Georg, 138 Simpson, Mrs Wallis, 43 Singer sewing machines, 54, 73 sixteenth century, 20, 22, 23, 24, 68, 118, 170, 179 synthetic fibres, 71 sizing of garments, 79, 124 slender figure, cult of, 114–16; different cultural ideals, 115, 116; explanations of, 116; history, 114– 15 skinheads, 197 Sloane Ranger style, 173 social change in relation to fashion, 47 social conformity, 35 social construction, 237, 246 Tabou night club, 187 socialism, 208, 216, 218, 220–1, 235 social mobility, 27, 33 social work profession, 222, 224 Society for the Protection of Birds, 222 strikes, 77, 86 Sunday Times, 174, 208, 237 tennis dresses, 160, 160–2 suntan, 131 tailors/taiĪoring, 16, 17, 72, 74, 76 Southall, Joseph, 216 Texás Tommy, 168 Thatcher, Margaret, 83 Taylor, Lou, 187, 271–5 Terry, Ellen, 210 superstition in relation to dress, 56 street vendors, 22–3, 24 Tatlin, V., 205 tan, 131 Supremes, The, 199 Tawney, R. H., 54 theatre, 169 sweatshops/sweated labour, 72, 74, 76, 78, 79, 80, 83, 84, 85 Swift, Jonathan, 220 Theory of the Leisure Class (Veblen), 50 street dress, 136, 137 Taiwan, 85 third world countries, 14, 84, 85 South Korea, 85, 86 Symingtons, 73–4 Story of O, The, 101 Spare Rib, 236 Soviet fashion, 205, 206 Sri Lanka, 85 tango, 168 sports: fashion influenced by sportswear, 27, 38, 43, 92, 166; sportswear, 158, 159, 160, 160–2, 165-6, 171 teds, 189–90, 191 television, 172 Thomas, Caitlin, 186 status in relation to dress, 50, 92 Thompson, E. P., 67 Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 99, 209, 224 Through The Looking Glass (Carroll), 1 Stead, Christina, 139 Stewart, A. T. & Co., 147 Steichen, Edward, 158 Stepanova, Varvara, 205 Tierra del Fuego, 55 tight lacing, 97–9, 99, 104 tights, 104 Time, 226 Times, The, 203, 214 Top Gear, 153 trade: influence on development of fashion, 20, 22; restrictions on, 24, 84 Trade, Board of, 76, 80 Trade Boards Act, 76 trades unions, 72, 74, 83, 84, 86 Transactions and Results of the National Association of Coal, Lime, and Ironstone Miners of Great Britain (1863), 163 transvestism, 121–2, 165 Triangle Shirtwaist fire, 77 trousers, 92, 94, 162–6, 182, 209 Tuffin, Sally, 174 twelfth century, 18 twentieth century 1900–1919: bohemian dress, 184–5; cosmetics, 109; dance, 166, 168; fashion, 34, 37, 38, 41, 78, 79, 98, 157, 158, 160, 162, 164, 188, 210; fashion industry, 71, 76, 77, 78; shops, 152; underwear, 102, 103, 104 ## Index twentietn century (cont) twentieth century (cont) 1920's: aesthetic of the ugly, 130 131; dance, 169; fashion, 30, 39, 43, 43, 47, 62, 63, 79, 89, 94, 218; films, 104; Harlem, 109, 110; mass production, 178, 179; oppositional dress, 185; personality types, 124; popular culture, 158, 160, 162, 164, 169, 171, 172, 176, 177, 178; popularization of twenties style, 172, 176, 177; shops, 152; Šoviet styles, 205; sport, 158, 160, 162, 171 1930's: bohemian dress, 185–6; fashion, 29, 39, 43, 89, 92, 92, 131; fashion industry, 79, 80, 83; films, 169–170; popular culture, 164, 170; popularization of thirties style, 114, 172; underwear, 104 1940's: cosmetics, 112, 114; domestic servants, 36; dress types, 124; fashion, 5, 42, 44, 47, 58, 90, 100, 101, 104, 139–40, 164; fashion industry, 80, 84; films, 143–4; oppositional dress, 186, 189, 198; popularization of forties style, 4, 172, 194; uniforms, 38 1950's: cosmetics, 112; fashion, 89, 165, 172, 173, 174; fashion industry, 71, 82, 83, 84, 88, 89; fashion photography, 46; oppositional dress, 186, 200; personality types, 124–5; reaction against establishment culture of, 65; shops, 152–3, 175; underwear, 104 1960's: cosmetics, 112; designers, 174–5 see also name of designer; fashion, 5, 165, 174–5, 176–7, 178, 240, 243; fashion industry, 71, 82, 83, 89; naturalism, 112, 130; oppositional dress, 184, 191, 192, 193, 199; period styles, 172; 176; popular culture, 65, 158, 165, 169, 172, 174–5, 176–7, 178; shops, 153, 175; underwear, 104, 106; uniforms, 36 1970's: cosmetics, 114; fashion industry, 83, 85, 90; fashion photography, 177–8; feminists, 240; naturalism, 130; oppositional dress, 133, 194, 195, 199, 201, 202; period styles, 172; popular culture, 65–6, 165, 172, 177–8; shops, 153; underwear, 106; uniforms, 36 1980's: career woman's style, 140; cities, 141; cosmetics, 114; fashion industry, 83, 84; Gaultier designs, 132–3; identity and fashion, 125; leisure wear, 142; no dominant mode of dress, 173; oppositional dress, 133, 196–7, 199, 201; period styles, 172; underwear, 106-7 Twenty One shop, 153 Twiggy, 177 typologies, 124–5 ugliness, 52, 53, 94 see also ugly, aesthetic of the ugly, aesthetic of the, 127-33, 189 see also ugliness underwear, 90, 95, 102–7, 178; history of, 102–7; influence of films on, 103; used as outerwear, 104, 106, 107; see also corsets uniforms, 35–6, 44, 80 United States: cosmetics, 109–10; dance, 168–9; dress reform, 208–9; fashion, 34, 78, 89, 139– 41, 142–3, 173, 226; fashion industry, 71, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79–80, 89, 235; feminism, 230; film industry, 92, 100, 126–7, 169, 170–1; homosexuals, 202; influence on British culture, 189, 190, 191; oppositional dress, 184– 5, 192, 193, 194–5, 198–9; popular culture, 169, 170–1, 177; shops, 146, 147, 152, 153, 154 see also name of shop; uniforms, 38 see also New York utilitarian ideology, 52–3, 230, 234, 247 Utility scheme, 80, 80, 82, 219 Utopia, (More), 220 utopian dress, 219–21, 224-5; feminist ideas, 224–5; Flugel's ideas, 219; More's ideas, 220; utopian (cont) socialist ideas, 220-1 see also dress reform Vanderbilt, Mrs William, 110 Van der Velde, Henry, 216 Van Vechten, Carl, 109 Veblen, Thorstein, 50–3, 58, 60, 94, 95, 208, 234, 245 Venezuela, 222 Vespucci, Amerigo, 220 Victorians, 29, 30, 108, 109, 128, 160, 186, 187–8, 210, 213 see also nineteenth century Vionnet, Madeleine, 88 viscose, 71 Viva Maria, 172 Vogue, 43, 44, 46, 89, 124–5, 130, 132, 174, 196 Von Freytag-von Loringhoven, Baronin, 185 Walker, A'Lelia, 109 Walker, Mme C. J., 109 Walker College of Hair Culture, 109 waltz, 166 Warehouse, 154 Warhol, Andy, 177 waterproof clothing, 160 Watts, George, 209 Waugh, EveĪyn, 39, 43 WAÑES uniform, 36 Weber, Max, 54 Wells, H. G., 221 Wharton, Edith, 103 White, John, 5 Whiteleys, 152 Who, The, 196 widows, 187–8 Wilde, Oscar, 214 Wilson, Harold, 176 Wimbledon, 160, 162 Windsmoor, 79 Wishes (Crashaw), 117 Wolfe, Èlsie de, 110 Wolsey, Cardinal, 23 Woman, 201 Woman of Florida (White), 5 Women (Cunnington), 48 Women's Dress for Success Book (Molloy), 140 women's magazines, 157 Woodstock, 194 wool industry, 68, 70, 71 Woollands, 153 working class: history of dress, 22–3, 24; skinheads and, 197; teds and, 189, 190; women's clothes, 156–7, 162–3, 164 see also class; domestic servants; dressmakers; exploitation of workers; shop workers Worth, Charles Frederick, 32, 33, 86, 88 York, Peter, 179 Yorkshire Miner, 241 Young Communist League, 205 youth market, 82, 173–4 youth oppositional styles see oppositional dress Zanuck, Daryl, 187 Zola, Emile, 62 zoot suits, 198–9