namely the construction of a society with an entirely new economic and social basis and the creation of a new socialist individual who would find and assume his or her place in this society. This involved the establishment of state agencies for producing films, publishing books, magazines, and newspapers, and promoting literacy among a population that was still largely illiterate. Such tasks were to engage the efforts of Soviet filmmakers, authors, artists, and designers during the years following the Civil War, known as the time of the New Economic Policy (NEP), which lasted until the inauguration of the First Five-Year Plan. This was an open time when avant-garde artists and designers were able to explore inventive formal languages that they hoped might better express the new political reality than the tired realism of the 19th century.

## The Vitebsk Art Institute

After the revolution, Lenin applied the term "Futurist" to all avant-garde artists, not just those associared with the pre-war Russian Futurist group. He had little taste for avant-garde art, favoring instead the 19th-century European realist tradition of art and literature. Nonetheless, avant-garde artists were active in government ministries, art schools, and cultural organizations, where they sought to formulate a new visual language to express their political ideals. Two important centers of avant-garde practice during the Civil War years were the Vitebsk Art Institute in the Pale of Settlement, a largely Jewish region, and the Art Section (IZO) within the People's Commissariat of Enlightenment.

At the Vitebsk Institute the dominant figure was the painter Kazimir Malevich (1878–1935), who had launched the Suprematist movement in 1915. The quintessential Suprematist painting was his Black Square of 1913, a rectilinear shape on a white ground. For Malevich, the black square represented "the zero degree of painting," a state of pure feeling rather than the visualization of nature or the social world.

Suprematism was for him a language of abstract colored shapes that he combined together in formal patterns held together in a state of tension.

In Vitebsk, Malevich was joined by El Lissitzky (r890-1941), who had studied architecture in Darmstadt, Germany, before the war. Some time after his return to Russia, Lissitzky, a Jew, became active in the movement to create a secular Yiddish culture. In 1919 he adopted a modified Cubist style to illustrate the traditional Passover story Had Gadya (The Goat Kid), and other Jewish children's books. In Vitebsk, where the artist Marc Chagall brought him in to head an architecture and graphic arts workshop, Lissitzky created a new form of abstract painting, which he called Proun, an acronym that meant "Project for a New Art."

Lissitzky joined the group called Unovis, which Malevich started. As stated in its manifesto, the aim of the group was to "construct the forms of life and projects," rather than to paint pictures. Malevich and his students adopted his formal language to design book covers, speakers' tribunes, and even the sides of a public tram in Vitebsk. In nearby Smolensk, where there was an outpost of the ROSTA Telegraph Agency, Malevich's Suprematist form language was applied to an army recruiting poster, which bore the text What have you done for the front?. Lissitzky adopted a more literal variant of Suprematist language for his poster of 1920, Beat the Whites with the Red Wedge (Fig. 20.06). Although the poster can be read as a metaphor—the wedge of the Red Army piercing the circle of their opponents known as the Whites—it is highly unlikely that it communicated effectively with a mass audience that was more attuned to realistic imagery.

Lissitzky also designed a children's book, About Two Squares, which used Malevich's forms—the red and black square (Plate o2). He prepared it in Vitebsk in 192o, but the book did not appear until 1922 when Gosizdat, the Soviet publishing house, brought it out in Berlin. In Lissitzky's tale, the two squares come to earth and witness a storm where everything flies apart. After the storm, a three-dimensional red structure