## Chapter 25: Central and Eastern Europe 1900-1939

## Introduction

The end of World War I brought momentous changes in Central and Eastern Europe. With the break-up of the Austro-Hungarian, German, and Russian empires, Bohemia, Moravia, Slovakia, Ruthenia and a small part of Silesia became Czechoslovakia; Hungary restored its ancient monarchy in 192o, experienced a brief Communist coup, and was ruled by a regent after the coup collapsed, while Austria became an independent republic. Following more than a century of partition, Poland regained its national sovereignty. The South Slavs formed the fragile Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929, comprised of a number of disparate parts, including the former states of Serbia and Montenegro, along with Croatia, Bosnia, Herzegovina, and Slovenia, among others. Romania, an independent state since the 187os, grew much larger as a result of diplomatic maneuvering during the war, while Bulgaria was under authoritarian rule for much of the interwar period. In the north, as a result of the Bolshevik Revolution, the Baltic states— Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania—gained independence for a brief period until they were traded back and forth between the Soviet Union and Germany during World War II.

With the exception of Czechoslovakia, which had a strong industrial base before the war, these new nations were all predominantly agricultural and moved towards greater industrialization with difficulty. As late as 1938, Central and Eastern Europe produced only 8 percent of Europe's industrial output and at least a third of that came from Czechoslovakia. The relation between the nascent middle classes and the peasants in the region was uneasy, due in part to the peasants' ambivalence towards industrialization and suspicions regarding most features of urban life. Because of redrawn boundaries, each nation also had to devote significant energy to creating a new transportation infrastructure, while defending its national sovereignty against the menacing claims of surrounding states to restore lost territories.

Besides class distinctions, fierce differences existed among ethnic minorities—Czechs, Slovaks, and Germans in Czechoslovakia; Poles, Ukrainians, Germans, and Jews in Poland; and Bosnians, Serbs, and Croats in Yugoslavia. Hungary, severely reduced in size due to the annexation of large portions of land by its neighbors, was also weakened by ethnic conflict. Religious hatred of long standing affected relations between Christians, Jews, and Muslims. Given their histories or their lack of histories, the political arrangements of all the countries in Eastern and Central Europe proved unstable. Positioned between more powerful nations to the west and the new Soviet Union to the east and riven with ethnic, religious, and class strife, none were able to maintain democratic governments throughout the entire interwar period, although Czechoslovakia's functioned until 1938.

For each country the creation of a national identity was a top priority in order to unite its disparate minorities or dominate them. Nationalism was more important than pluralism and those groups that did not easily fall within a nationalist agenda were generally marginalized or oppressed. The creation of a national identity often meant drawing on traditional forms of culture—whether expressed in buildings, decorative arts, music, art, or literature—rather than embracing the new cultural forms of modernity. However, modernism did establish itself within small enclaves of avant-garde artists and theorists in a number of the new nations, as well as among Functionalist designers who drew their inspiration largely from the contemporary tendencies in Germany and France and to a limited degree from