the architect František Tröster (1904–68); the photographer Jaromír Funke (1896–1945); and the graphic designer Zdeněk Rossman (1905–1984), who had previously studied at the Bauhaus in Dessau. Prominent artists and architects from abroad including Hannes Meyer, the Bauhaus director; László Moholy-Nagy; Jan Tschichold; and Lajos Kassák also lectured at the school. Shortly before it closed, a film school was established under the direction of Karol Plicka (1894–1987).

One intention of the School of Applied Arts was to contribute to the industrial expansion of Slovakia. Beautiful carpets with modern geometric designs were produced in the textile workshop; furniture in wood and metal was created although the designs of a few wooden chairs and tables were a throwback to the Rondo-Cubist style. Julia Horová and her students also created some functional ceramic objects for mass production and pieces from the metal workshop were manufactured by several companies, notably the small objects that Bohumil Južnič created: ashtrays, book ends, ladles, serving spoons, and butter dishes among them. Some were marketed by the Sandrik Company and others by Ladislav Sutnar for Krásna jizba.

Both the graphic design and photography departments were leading contributors to Czech Functionalist design and advertising art. Zdeněk Rossman, who brought Joost Schmidt's graphic approach from the Bauhaus, headed the graphic design department, while Jaromír Funke, a leading Czech avant-garde photographer, directed the photography department. Many of Funke's students subsequently achieved distinction in the advertising industry. In other fields such as the design of interiors and theater sets, faculty and students were also distinguished. Overall, the Bratislava School of Applied Arts managed to foster a spirit of collaboration among departments and came closest of any in Czechoslovakia to implementing a Bauhaus-inspired pedagogy and a Functionalist style across a number of different artistic practices.

## Czech automobiles

During the interwar period, Czechoslovakia produced two automobies of importance, the Škoda and the Tatra. The Škoda Works originally manufactured weapons, but in 1924 it acquired Laurin & Klement, a company that had been founded in 1895 to make bicyles. The firm then branched out to produce motorcycles and shortly thereafter automobiles. Based on the success of their first automobile, the Voiturette, in 19o5, they expanded their automobile production and continued to make cars under their own name well into the 192os. Laurin & Klement started making trucks just before they merged with the Škoda Works in 1925. The first car to bear the Škoda trademark was a luxury Hispano-Suiza sedan, whose license to produce it in Czechoslovakia the Škoda firm had purchased. The company made breakthroughs in the 193os with the Škoda Popular and the Škoda Rapid, both launched in 1934. The two cars were manufactured in various models from Tudor and roadster to cabriolet and they possessed the best design features of similar cars produced elsewhere in Europe-—swept back bodies, stylized grills, and rounded front fenders among them.

In 1919, the company originally titled Nesselsdorfer Wagenbau-Fabriksgesellschaft, producer of the first automobile in Central Europe, adopted the name Tatra, which was derived from the Tatra Mountains. The Austrian designer, Hans Ledwinka (1878–1967), who returned to the company after working for another automobile manufacturer, designed the Tatra I1, a small car that was the first Tatra model to adopt some of the features that would characterize later Tatra cars, especially the tubular backbone with independent suspension at the rear. The model also pioneered many basic features of modern small-car design. Following the Tatra II were other cars from the Tatra 12 to the Tatra 57, all of which displayed significant improvements.

Ledwinka's design of the Tatra 77, the first of a line of aerodynamic streamlined cars with rear-mounted