## Commercial art and typography

In 1918, two years before the new constitution was drawn up, the National Committee, which was shepherding Czechoslovakia towards full independence, invited the Art Nouveau artist Alphonse Mucha, well known as an avid Czech nationalist, to design its new postage stamps. Mucha's first series featured the Prague Castle, the most prominent symbol of national identity, which also embodied a strong sense of tradition. Following the stamps, Mucha was asked to design a series of banknotes, several of which appeared in 1919 and 192o. He drew heavily on Art Nouveau ornament and lettering, while also including symbols of Czech nationalism such as the lion, the falcon, and the dove. In addition to stamps and banknotes, he designed other state paraphernelia including an initial version of the national emblem and he even offered suggestions for police uniforms.

Mucha had returned to the Czech lands from France in 191o and lived there following independence until his death in 1939. His major project during the years of his return was a cycle of 2o large paintings known as the Slav Epic. Unveiled in 1928, they were received by the Czechoslovak public with mixed emotions, particularly as many people were by this time more interested in the international iconography of modernism with its concomitant cosmpolitan character than in a series of paintings that returned them to the nation's conflicted past.

As a strong counterpart to Mucha's Art Nouveau designs, Josef Čapek (1887-1945), Jiří Dréman (1892–1946), Jiří Kroha (1893–1974), and Václav Špála (1885–1946) introduced a Cubist vocabulary to poster design between 1918 and 192o. Their posters were mainly for art exhibitions, small publications, cabarets, and theaters promoted by the Prague arts community. Čapek's lithographic poster for a small literary publication Červen (June) of 1918 depicts the head and arms of a newsboy hawking the publication against a backdrop of tall building fragments, reinforcing both the modernity of the publication as indicated by the visual style of the poster and its contemporary urban context, depicted by buildings behind the news boy. Of particular significance in this poster is Čapek's use of partial images to stand in for entire bodies or objects, a technique of Cubist painting and collage. Čapek, who was involved in Prague literary culture as a book illustrator, cover designer, and a writer, also did a series of dramatic two-color book covers for several publishers that opened up new possibilities for this genre. His brother Karel Čapek was the author of the play R. U.R., an early attempt to depict robots with human-like qualities and in fact, it was Karel Čapek who coined the term“robot."

Even though the Cubist visual vocabulary was not adopted by the mainstream advertising poster designers as it was in France, Cubist posters nonetheless created a break with the earlier naturalist and Secessionist approaches, thus clearing the way for other contemporary styles from France and Germany. There were two centers of poster production: Prague and Brno. Though Brno was not as culturally cosmopolitan as Prague, it was a major industrial city in Moravia, which had strong ties to Germany. Thus a number of the Brno poster designers were German or of German origin. Among them were Hans Jakesch (dates unconfirmed) and Eduard Milén (1891–1976), an artist who designed posters for numerous cultural events. Milén also devoted much of his time to art directing the literary magazine Lidové noviny (Popular Newspaper) for which he did layouts, illustrations, and posters in a modern style with flat colors.

Czechoslovakia in the interwar years was striving to follow the lead of France and Germany as a center for modern commerce and culture. Posters thus promoted new fashions for men and women, restaurants and night clubs, resorts, publications, and increasingly films as the young Czech film industry developed. A few artists such as Václav Klimánek (1892–d.o.d. unconfirmed) and Leo Heilbrun (dates unconfirmed) adopted the style of the French fashion illustrators, but the German style, stemming from the work of Lucian Bernhard