and others, was more prevalent. Much of the poster work was done by advertising agencies such as Studio Pacold, UR Praga, Decart, Weigelt, Studio Rötter, Hofbauer-Pokorný, Heilbrun, and the Vodicka Studios. Among the leading studio poster designers was Emil Weiss (1896–1964), whose posters for men's fashions, nightspots like the Alhambra and Lucerne Cabaret-Restaurant, and the Walter Junior automobile were strongly influenced by American, German, and French tendencies. There was a marked difference between the advertising agency posters, which adopted the latest techniques from abroad, and those of independent poster designers such as František Kysela and Zdeněk Rykr (1900–1940), who were engaged in other activities like painting, book design, and illustration. Of all the Czech commerical artists in the interwar years, Kysela, whose design repertoire ranged from posters to textile patterns and tapestries, was the most versatile, working in styles that varied from highly illustrative to conceptual and Functionalist.

Following the early interest in typography by Preissig and others involved in the Book Beautiful movement, little progress was made in developing a modern Czech typeface until 1932 when Oldřich Menhart (1897-1962) designed Menhart Antiqua and Menhart Cursive for the Bauer Foundry in Germany. Though influenced by Preissig's Antikva, Menhart eschewed his predecessor's more idiosyncratic artistic approach, concentrating instead on calligraphy and earlier typography as sources.

The 192os saw an emphasis on creating an inherently Czech typeface in accord with nationalist aspirations. Menhart addressed the problem not by drawing on Czech folkloric or decorative elements but instead by taking into account the peculiarities of the Czech language with its exceptional number of diacritical marks. His typefaces for Bauer, which presented reasonable solutions to the peculiarities of Czech typesetting, were the first Czech faces to achieve international recognition and they prepared the way for the designer's subsequent Menhart Roman (Fig. 25.o8) and Italic for the Monotype Corporation in 1936 as well as for his numerous typeface designs after World War II.

# AÁÄBCČDDEÉÉFGHIIJKLMN NOÓÖPQRRSŠTTUUUUVW XYYZŽ aáäbcčddeéěfghiijklmnñoóöp qrřsšttuúuüvwxyyzž 1234567890!?St00,"\*-:;...