the 193os and provided work for a group of magazine photographers including Václav Jírů (1910-198o), who was active as well in advertising campaigns for the Aero car company.

Some Czech photojournalists may have been influenced by the work of the German photomontagist John Heartfield, who escaped from Germany in 1933 when Hitler came to power and lived in Prague for much of the period between 1933 and 1938. He continued to create photomontages for the German workers' magazine AIZ, which was produced there and then smuggled into Germany. He also continued to work for his brother's publishing house, Malik-Verlag and did occasional work for Czech publishers of books and magazines.

## Poland

After a long tradition of independence from the 1oth to the late 18th century, Poland was partitioned between Russia, Austria, and Prussia and did not become a nation again until the inauguration of a new Polish Republic in 1918. A parliament governed the republic until 1926 when Marshal Józef Piłsudski took over the government and instituted a dictatorship that lasted until his death in 1935, when a weak democracy was instituted until the German invasion in 1939.

During the time of partition, a sense of Polish community was maintained through the arts and other intellectual pursuits including the applied arts. In the late 19th and early 2oth centuries, Cracow, which was located in the province of Galicia, a part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, became the leading center of applied arts activity among the Poles, largely because the authorities did not regulate or suppress the cultural activities of minorities, especially as they pertained to the expression of national identity. Following independence, Poland's cultural center shifted to Warsaw although designers and architects from Cracow continued to be influential.

## Nationalism and the Arts and Crafts influence before independence

Cracow became a center of Polish arts and crafts as early as 1868 when Adrjan Baraniecki (1828–1891), a Pole who had met John Ruskin in London and been impressed with Henry Cole's South Kensington Museum, decided to establish a Museum of Industry with support from the mayor of Cracow. Baraniecki's aim was to present models of craft excellence that could counter the tide of cheap mass-produced goods that were pouring into the predominantly agricultural region from the industrial centers of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, namely the Czech lands of Bohemia and Moravia. He amassed a huge collection of artifacts from tools to tapestries and promoted educational courses both for Galician craftsmen as well as for the general public.

After the architect Tadeusz Stryjeński (1849–1943) became director of the museum in 1907, he established a group of workshops both before and after the new building he designed was erected in 1913. These included a bookbinding studio, a metal workshop, a carpentry workshop, and studios for printing and photography. Their contribution to improving the quality of Galician goods was enhanced by the proximity of the National Institute for the Promotion of Handicraft and Industry, which shared space in the new museum with them. Through its journal, Handicraft Review, and the publication of translated books by foreign design theorists such as Hermann Muthesius, as well as through exhibitions and other activities, the museum played an important role in fostering an indigenous Arts and Crafts movement in Galicia.

Where Baraniecki was concerned with issues of production, labor, and the quality of goods, Stanisław Witkiewicz (1851–1915), an author, artist, and art critic, was more interested in discovering a national Polish style. He believed he had found it in the folk culture of the Górale or highlanders who lived in and around Zakopane in the foothills below the Tatra Mountains. Historian David Crowley has noted that the Górale lived as farmers and shepherds untouched by industry or the bureaucracy of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. Witkiewicz was fascinated by their wooden furniture and household objects, which he felt were quintessentially Polish, and he was also taken with the vernacular design of their log cabins, especially the half-gabled roofs.

Having moved to Zakopane, Witkiewicz and some architectural colleagues created their own interpretation of the Zakopane style in several houses they built. Witkiewicz's House under the Firs, designed for an economist and historian and completed in 1897, was an attempt to elevate the Górale vernacular to the status of a Gesamtkunstwerk or total work of art similar to William Morris's Red House in England, or Henry van de Velde's Bloemenwerf in Uccle, Belgium. In both of those buildings, the architectural design was integrated with a complete interior as it was in Zakopane.

The House under the Firs had a steeply pitched roof with a series of decorated gables, stepped windows, and a stone base on which the wooden frame was erected. Witkiewicz adapted the rich local ornament—-stylized suns, thistles, and flowers——for door frames, gable ends, and structural beams. He applied it as well to all the furniture and other interior elements that he and his friends designed. Local craftsmen produced everything including most of the fabric coverings and curtains as well as two large ovens that heated the house. For Witkiewicz, the combination of vernacular forms and local craftsmanship in Zakopane clearly embodied the nationalist Polish style that he sought when he arrived there. In an attempt to export the style, he created designs for a porcelain jug and bowl based on a local ladle for goat's milk. A French ceramics factory in Sèvres produced these and marketed them under the rubric Le Style Polonaise (The Polish Style).

Other artists, architects, critics, and designers in Cracow supported the Zakopane style, which was one reason for their founding the Polish Applied Arts Society (Towarzystwo Polska Sztuka Stosowana) in 1901. Another stimulus was their espousal of Arts and

Crafts ideals expressed in the Polish translations of writings by John Ruskin and William Morris around the turn of the century. Leading members of the society included artists Karol Tichy (1871–1939) and Stanisław Wyspiański (1869-1907), sculptor Jan Szczepkowski (1878–1963), and architect Józef Czajkowski (1872– 1947). The society was intent on preserving traditional Polish culture, which it sought to do through restoration projects, attention to the preservation of vernacular objects, and an adoption of traditional forms for contemporary designs.

The work of the Applied Arts Society members drew from various sources, not just the Polish vernacular. Located in Cracow, within the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, members were also influenced by events in Vienna, notably the Secession exhibitions and the formation of the Wiener Werkstätte. As individual commissions for either commercial or residential interiors increased, the design language became more contemporary and cosmopolitan. Tichy, for example, was strongly influenced by the spare designs for chairs and cabinets of Josef Hoffmann in Vienna. One of Szczepkowski's manufactured table lamps that was produced by the M. Jarry factory had a stylized bronze bird as its base and a two-tiered fringed shade, while Czajkowski's decorative chairs for a Cracow restaurant recalled the form of the Greek klismos with its curved legs and back.

Wyspiański may have been the best known member of the society as he was a prominent painter, stained glass artist, and a playwright who was considered to be the founder of Polish modern drama. One of his major projects was the dramatic interior for the Church of St. Francis in Cracow, where he combined elaborate frescoes with richly colored stained-glass windows. As historian Józef Mrozek points out, Wyspiański created his own idea of a national style through the range of commissions he undertook, including the furniture he designed as part of the scenery for one of his own plays.

In 1913 some members of the society formed the Warsztaty Krakówskie (Cracow Workshops) with