a few other colleagues to create a more cohesive and socially focused working environment. Housed in the Museum of Industry, the Cracow Workshops intended to bring together artists and craftsmen to enoble production through handicraft." Like similar workshops in England, Germany, Austria, and Russia, the Cracow Workshops proposed to raise the level of craft production as an antidote to the welter of mass-produced goods that had flooded the market in Galicia. Likewise, the founders hoped to bring quality goods to everyone, thus echoing the ideal of William Morris and other founders of the Arts and Crafts movement. There was little that the workshops were able to accomplish before war broke out in 1914, but they played a prominent role in the early development of the decorative arts in the new Polish Republic after the war.

A parallel initiative to the various crafts societies and workshops in Cracow was the founding and development of the School of Fine Arts in Warsaw, which was part of the Russian partition. A private school, it opened officially in 1904 with a small faculty of prominent artists among whom was Karol 'Tichy. The school differed from its predecessor, the Cracow Academy of Art, in two significant ways. From the beginning there was a commitment to the applied arts as well as the fine arts and by 19o7 two applied arts studios were producing designs for lamps and lampshades, kilims, ceramics, and advertising graphics. The second difference was that the school began to admit women after 192o and soon more than half the students were female.

## The Cracow School and the continued quest for a national style

Following independence, Warsaw became the center of the new Polish government and also began to assume the role of the nation's cultural capital. As a result, a number of artists, designers, and architects from Cracow moved there. Some obtained positions at the Warsaw School of Fine Arts, which the state took over in 1922 and which achieved the status of an Academy ten years later. Karol Tichy became the school's director and Józef Czajkowski formulated its new educational program. The Cracow School, as this loose network of like-minded artists and designers was called, shared a dislike for the industrial products that modernists at the Bauhaus and elsewhere in Europe promoted, preferring instead to encourage the production of high-quality craft products, which had been their aim since the turn of the century.

After 1918, the original Cracow Workshops retained its base in the city's Museum of Industry. The remaining members still espoused the revival of handicraft production, although they were not able to create a market for their own products. Their survival, until bankruptcy forced them to close in 1926, came from a government commission in 1922 to produce many of the Polish exhibits for the 1925 Paris Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs. The commission for the Polish Pavilion went to Józef Czajkowski, a founder of the Workshops, whose design combined a modernized classical facade topped by several rows of angular sculptural elements. Behind it was a tower of metal chevrons that was illuminated at night. Although the building was considered at the time to represent a new national style, it nonetheless strongly recalled the earlier Czech Cubist facades of Josef Chochol and Josef Gočár.

The interior by contrast was extremely traditional, featuring heavy wooden rustic benches designed by Karol Stryjeński (1887–1932), who derived their forms from the wooden furniture of the Górale people near Zakopane. Also featured in the pavilion were six large painted frescoes depicting Slavic myths and peasant festivals by Stryjeński's wife Zofia Stryjeńska (1891-1976). As a young woman, Stryjeńska attended the prestigious all-male Art Academy in Munich for a year and a half disguised as a man. After returning to Cracow, she illustrated many books with themes from Polish folklore before undertaking the panels for the Paris exhibition.

The Polish exhibits at the Paris exposition were spread across several venues and featured objects made in a number of Polish workshops as well as in various schools of applied art. The Poles won 172 prizes, more than any other nation, and in that sense, the exhibit was a glorious justification of the Cracow School argument for a new culture of handicrafts. But in the eyes of some critics and officials, it was a failure because it contributed little or nothing to the creation of a modern industrial economy.

Opposing this critique was a group of Cracow School members who were professors at the Warsaw School of Fine Arts, notably Czakowski, Wojciech Jastrzębowski (1884-1963), Stryeński, and Tichy. The year after the Paris exposition, they and others formed a new cooperative workshop, Ład (Harmony), just as its predecessor, the Cracow Workshops, was going bankrupt. Ład's intent was to design furniture, ceramics, silverware, interiors, and textiles as its members had already done for many years. Ład weavers became specialists in the production of one-off kilim rugs, while its ceramists developed simple forms and furniture and its designers created furniture with basic construction. Metalwork, however, continued to draw on the Zakopane style. As the inheritor of the Cracow School ideals, Ład was successful in large part due to the financial support it garnered from the government particularly the Ministry of Industry and Trade and the National Economic Bank.

After Marshal Józef Piłsudski became the nation's dictator in 1926, the Cracow School aesthetic continued as a national style. Given the absence of an enlightened middle class to support modern design as could be found in Prague, major commissions for the Cracow School therefore came from the government. These included the design of government buildings such as the Ministry of Religion and Public Education of 1928 and the National Economic Bank, which was constructed between 1928 and 1935. The competition for the Ministry of Religion interior was won by Wojciech Jastrzębowski, who inroduced a ceremonial modernism in which he juxtaposed geometric motifs with traditional Polish symbols and native materials.

The Cracow School approach was combined with a modernist vocabulary in an unusual government project of 1929-1931: the design of a summer residence for the state president, Ignacy Mościcki. The architect, Adolf Szyszko-Bohusz (1883-1948), a member of the Cracow School, nonetheless adopted a modernist rhetoric by imposing a series of geometric blocks over an open plan, although he introduced a traditional element by cladding the building in rough sandstone. The interior designers furnished the residence with chromed tubular steel chairs and desks that were custom-made by the firm of Konrad Jarnuszkiewicz, which produced a line of such furniture for the market. The choice of modern exterior and interior elements for a government commission was unusual and remained something of an anomaly in the years to come.

The cultural status of the Cracow School was further enhanced after Jastrzębowski became director of the Department of Art in the Ministry of Religion and Public Education in 1928. This position gave him authority over the art schools as well as the power to dispense various commissions and appointments. Several years later, Władysław Skoczylas (1883-1934), a wood engraver who continued to draw on themes from the Zakopane region, became rector of the Warsaw School of Fine Arts and then president of the Institute for the Promotion of Art. The Institute's director was Karol Stryjeński, also a strong advocate of the Zakopane style.

In 1929, Ład was invited to design ten rooms at the Universal National Exposition in Poznań, one of Poland's major industrial centers. Held under the auspices of the Ministry of Trade, the exhibition celebrated a decade of national independence. In a statement published in the catalog, Ład continued to promote the experimental workshop model, defining the workshop's role as a place to prepare prototypes for industry. Rejecting large factories as sites of production, the Ład designers believed that the purpose of machines