lines and planes. One of Rodchenko's projects was a kiosk, which he depicted as a dynamic information and publicity center that combined different services—a clock, a billboard, a speaker's platform, a poster hoarding, and a space for the sale of books and newspapers.

Far more ambitious than the drawings of the artists and architects in Zhivskul'ptarkh was the Monument to the Third International that Vladimir Tatlin (1885-1953), an IZO artist, created. IZO commissioned it to commemorate the Comintern or Third International, the organization the party had set up to foment revolution around the world. The monument, which Tatlin produced as a model, received wide attention when it was exhibited at the Eighth Congress of the Communist Party in December 192o. Working with several assistants, Tatlin created a structure of wood that combined a spiral form with a straight angular spine. Inside the structure were three forms whose exteriors were to consist of glass. The monument was to include a motor that would enable the forms to rotate at different speeds.

The bottom form, a cube, was intended for large meetings of legislative assemblies and was to complete one revolution per year. The middle form, a pyramid, was to rotate once a month and would be used for smaller administrative meetings, while the top form, a cylinder, would rotate once a day and would house propaganda services such as preparing newspapers as well as proclamations, pamphlets, and manifestoes (Fig. 2o.o8). Tatlin intended the monument to be taller than the Eiffel Tower but he endowed it with so much structural complexity that it could not possibly have been built.

Nonetheless, it became a powerful symbol of revolutionary aspirations, not only in the Soviet Union, but among avant-garde artists' groups in Western Europe as well. It demonstrated that new forms could be conceived to represent unprecedented revolutionary ideals and it provided encouragement for other artists, designers, and architects in the Soviet Union to invent their own forms rather than rely on the West for their artistic and architectural inspiration. The description of Tatlin's monument provides a fitting coda to the discussion of design during the period of War Communism. The revolution began with a search for appropriate symbols to represent the new Soviet state and ended with a project whose ambitions far exceeded the state's ability to make it a reality.

## New Economic Policy (NEP) 1921–1928

At the end of the Civil War, the Russian economy was in a shambles. To facilitate recovery, Lenin introduced the New Economic Policy (NEP), which allowed a limited return of capitalism in order to get the economy moving again. The policy was most evident in the sphere of agriculture, where the peasants were allowed to work their own land and keep the profits. In addition, small traders and merchants called Nepmen provided consumer goods for the peasants and others who could pay for them.

Agriculture recovered far more quickly than industry, which continued to struggle with problems of coordination and management. The leadership foresaw the need for a master plan to guide the economy and the first one, GOELRO, was drawn up to introduce widespread electrification. It was not until the beginning of the First Five-Year Plan in 1928, however, that a process was in place to coordinate the nation's thousands of factories and other enterprises.

During the NEP, Vesenkha (Supreme Council of the National Economy) created a series of administrative bodies called glavki or “trusts” to manage entire industries. By 1922, there were 430 of them. To work effectively, the glavki system required sophistication and discipline, both of which were in short supply. Nonetheless, the trusts provided the impetus for industrial development in sectors that ranged from automobiles to baby pacifiers.

Because the Soviet state had to compensate for the high percentage of goods that had been imported under the czars but were no longer available, the NEP period was one of industrial experiment and a certain