the CIAM debates. For the exhibition, the Warsaw Housing Cooperative allocated 2o flats whose interiors modern architects could arrange with inexpensive furniture. For one flat, Szymon and Helena Syrkus created some custom-made pieces of tubular iron furniture, which was manufactured by the firm of Konrad Jarnuszkiewicz, the company that made the chromed steel furniture for the president's summer residence. The significance of the Syrkuses' metal furniture, however, was more in its proposed application to the Polish working-class interior than in any original advance on what Marcel Breuer, Mart Stam, or Mies van der Rohe had already done. The one original contribution of the Syrkuses was a metal bed that could stand upright in a corner when not in use. A curtain could be pulled around it to conceal its function and integrate it with the daytime decor. According to one journalist, the best interior in the Minimum Flat exhibition was by two other Praesens members, the architects Stanisław Brukalski (1894–1967) and his wife Barbara Brukalska (1899–1980), both graduates of the Warsaw Polytechnic. They produced simple prototypes for cupboards and armchairs made of laminated plywood, which were recognized for their efficiency.

The next year Syrkus and his wife created additional metal furniture for the rooms of a small sanitorium they designed in Konstancin. Like the furniture for the Modern Housing Exhibition, it was manufactured by Konrad Jarnuszkiewicz, whose firm, unfortunately, did not introduce it to a wider domestic market. The company did, however, produce various lines of furniture made from steel tubing for residences, hospitals, offices, and gardens. Among its models was a cantilever chair with a plywood seat, back, and armrests for which Marcel Breuer's Bauhaus chair of 1928 was surely a source.

In their design of moderately priced housing estates in the early 193os, Brukalski and Brukalska introduced a more industrial “kitchen laboratory," along the lines of Greta Schütte-Lihotsky's Frankfurt kitchen of several years earlier, but subsequently they softened their industrial look with free-standing wooden kitchen furniture for their villa entry in the Housing Building Exhibition of 1935. An important source of furniture designs for serial production in the 193os was the Studio of Interiors and Utensils that the architect Stefan Sienicki (1897-1970) established in the Faculty of Architecture at the Warsaw Polytechnic. Sienicki, a former furniture designer for Thonet Mundus, directed his studio'towards the creation of prototypes for the Polish furniture industry which, as David Crowley has noted, consisted primarily of small manufacturers and workshops. Hence, Sienicki fostered projects that used native materials and appealed to a conservative middle class, recognizing as well the limited capability of the nation's factories and workshops to produce high-end industrial furniture for a mass market.

## The neglected profession of industrial design

During the 192os and 193os, the profession of industrial design was unknown in Poland. Artists, craftsmen, and architects produced furniture and household objects but the design of electrical appliances, cars, trains, ships, and planes was the work of engineers. The Elektrit Company, a manufacturer of radios, produced its first radio in 1927 and by the end of the decade was making around 90 percent of the nation's receivers. The firm employed engineers and technicians to keep the technology current, while the wooden housings with their boxy shapes and rounded edges were most likely done by craftsmen. The Elektrit Automatic Z of 1938–1939 featured 12 push buttons with the names of broadcasting stations on them, although they were complemented by a knob in case the owner wanted to find the stations manually.

Unlike Czechoslovakia, Poland did not have an automobile industry, although the country did manufacture one car, the CWS T-1, which was first produced in 1928 as a four-seat coupe designed especially for Polish road conditions. Production was short lived, however, and it was taken out of