production in 193ı. More enduring was the streamlined railroad engine, known as the Pm36, that was designed in 1937 for the Polish national railroad by engineers in the Aerodynamics Institute at the Warsaw Polytechnic. The shell design was done by a team under the direction of Kazimierz Zembrzuski (19o5-1981), while another team handled problems of construction. The shell was attached to a skeletal frame and covered all the machinery except for three drive wheels. In appearance, the Pm36, with its swept-back form, was similar to other streamlined locomotives that were designed around the same time in the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union, and elsewhere. Some were done by engineers and others by industrial designers.

One ambitious project of the 193os was the two Polish ocean liners, the M/S Pitsudski and the M/S Batory, both of which sailed for the Gdynia America Line. The first was completed in 1934, the second in 1936, though sadly a German mine sank the Pitsudski in 1939. The two ships were designed primarily to take Polish emigrants to North America and then to serve as links between them and Poland. They were constructed in an Italian shipyard but Polish architects and designers did the interior design and furniture to emphasize the ships' nationalist character. Unlike earlier government commissions in the 192os, Cracow School architects and designers did not dominate the project. They shared the interior design of both ships with modernist artists and architects, a collaboration that represented a new accomodation among the different schools of thought about architecture and design in Poland.

## Graphic design

## Commercial art and typography

The same cultural ferment in Cracow that fostered the applied arts movement at the end of the 19th century generated the first artistic posters in Poland. Many were done for art exhibitions and other cultural events by artists associated with the Młoda Polska (Young Poland) movement as well as with the Polish Applied Arts Society. Initially Art Nouveau was an influence, as in a poster by Teodor Axentowicz (1859-1938) for the Cracow art society, Sztuka (Art). His image of a beautiful woman in a Polish folk costume recalls the posters of Alphonse Mucha in Paris.

Similar to movements in Brussels, Vienna, or Munich, Młoda Polska artists were interested in dissolving the boundaries between the fine and applied arts. Besides making posters, they also designed books and periodicals such as Życie (Life), the literary magazine attached to Młoda Polska which promoted a modern style of typography, illustration, and page layout similar to Jugend in Munich and Ver Sacrum in Vienna.

Some members of the Polish Applied Arts Society also designed posters to promote the society's exhibitions and other cultural events. Among them were Józef Czajkowski, Wojciech Jastrzębowski, Józef Mehoffer (1869-1946), Stanisław Wyspianski, and Karol Frycz (1877–1963), all of whom were active in the applied arts or architecture. Besides Art Nouveau and the folk art of the Zakopane region, poster designers were open to other influences such as the French fashion illustrators as well as artists in Germany and Italy like Julius Klinger and Leonetto Cappiello. In general, the Polish posters did not break any new ground but those by Frycz displayed varied drawing styles of some interest as well as idiosyncratic lettering. Artists in Warsaw also produced posters during this period, many of which had bilingual Polish and Russian texts.

As with the applied arts, after World War I, the center of the graphic arts shifted to Warsaw. The first modern poster artists in Poland whose work could rival that of artists elsewhere in Europe were former students of Zygmunt Kamiński (1888-1969) and Edmund Bartłomiejczyk (1885-1950), who taught drawing courses in the Department of Architecture at the Warsaw Polytechnic. Both had absorbed the ambition of the Polish Applied Arts Society to elevate the artistic level of daily life objects. Kamiński held the chair for freehand drawing and developed an intensive four-year drawing curriculum that began with geometric shapes and then moved on to nature, plaster casts, and live models. Under Kamiński's tutelage, students learned to work in different media including pencil, pen, chalk, and paint. From 1917, Bartłomiejczyk headed the program in perspective drawing, where students were taught to render three-dimensional forms in flat space. He was a skilled woodcut artist with an extensive background as a book illustrator and engraver as well as a designer of postage stamps, banknotes, and advertising leaflets. Both Kamiński and Bartłomiejcyzk also designed posters, but they worked in an illustrative style that broke no new ground in the medium.

Given their extensive training in visual art, it was thus not surprising that some students at the Warsaw Polytechnic decided to become poster artists rather than architects. 'The most successful of them was Tadeusz Gronowski (1894-199o), who was probably the first artist in Poland to embrace the modern style of advertising poster that was prominent elsewhere in Europe. Gronowski never practiced architecture, but instead built a career in graphic design. He was, however, able to use much that he had learned at the Polytechnic, notably the disciplined representation of objects in space and the simplification of forms that differed greatly from the more painterly poster tradition of the early post-war years. In 1923, he co-founded one of the first Polish advertising studios, Plakat (Poster), with Jerzy Gelbard (1894–1944) and another partner.

Cassandre was a strong influence on Gronowski and he became familiar with Cassandre's work through frequent visits to Paris. Besides mastering modern techniques of reproduction that included the airbrush, Gronowski was instrumental in shifting Polish poster design from an illustrative style to a more conceptual one, whereby an image could convey an idea rather than simply function as an illustration. This was evident in an early poster that helped build his reputation, an advertisement for Radion, a washing compound whose efficacy Gronowski portrayed by showing one black cat jumping into a sudsy pail of the compound and another white cat jumping out (Plate

28). Accompanying the image was the concise slogan, "Radion cleans for you.'

Gronowski worked for diverse clients— manufacturers of soaps, chocolates, or cigarettes, as well as government agencies and organizations that supported social causes. He also helped to promote the inauguration of Poland's national airline, LOT, which the Ministry of Civil Air Transportation established in 1928. Gronowski designed the first logo for the airline, an abstract image of a crane in flight—and then helped encourage the airline's passenger business through a number of posters that gave both the planes and the passengers a fashionable look. He did illustrations as well for various popular magazines, thus defining a type of diverse modern graphic design practice that had not existed in Poland before.

Other poster designers who were trained at the Warsaw Polytechnic as architects included Stefan Osiecki (1902-1939), Adam Bowbelski (1903-1968), Maciej Nowicki (1910-1951), Stanisława Sandecka (1912-d.o.d. unconfirmed), Janusz Alchimowicz (1907–1945), Marian Walentynowicz (1896–1967), Jerzy Hryniewiecki (1908–1989), and Jerzy Skolimowski (1907–1985). In general, these men and women, like Gronowski, drew significantly from the French moderne poster style as well as from the visual rhetoric of streamlining. Their images were spare, they worked primarily with flat colors, and their lettering was always well formed and integrated with their overall designs Nowicki and Sandecka, who later married, formed the Studio for Art Graphics, collaborating as well with Bowbelski, while Osiecki and Skolimowski worked together, sometimes with several other partners. With very few exceptions, these designers avoided photography in their poster designs as their training in drawing and painting was extremely strong. They were recognized internationally at the 1937 World Exposition in Paris, where their posters garnered a number of prizes. Besides graphic design, some of them also designed exhibitions and interiors.

More graduates of the Polytecnic might have continued in architecture at the time except that the Polish economy suffered greatly during the 193os and there was little work for architects. There was, however, a great need for graphic design since commerce, industry, and government all sought modern visual forms to communicate with the public.

Meanwhile, in 1926 Bartłomiejcyzk moved to the Warsaw School of Fine Arts, where he became head of the newly formed Faculty of Applied Graphic Design, a studio that complemented the Faculty of Artistic Graphics, which taught printmaking and other graphic arts and was headed by the traditional woodcut artist Władysław Skoczylas. Students who studied graphic design with Bartłomiejcyzk at the School of Fine Arts generally adopted a more painterly approach than those at the Warsaw Polytechnic. Among them were Edward Manteuffel (1908–1941), Antoni Wajwód (1905–1944), and Jadwiga Hładki (1904–1044). In 1933, these three formed a studio, Mewa (Seagull), where they worked together until 1936. Some consider this studio to have been the most important in Poland during the interwar years. The three principal designers had diverse talents and worked on a range of commissions from posters and stamp designs to large painted murals.

Although many poster designers and graphic artists came from the Polytechnic or the School of Fine Arts, some who gained prominence either studied at other schools or were self-taught. In 1933, Jan Lewitt and Jerzy Him, who changed his name to George Him when he settled in England, formed Lewitt-Him to produce posters and advertising with a humorous touch, and in 1937 they moved to London where their understated wit was more in tune with the British sensibility. Stefan Norblin (1892–1939), a painter, illustrator, and graphic artist, studied in Germany and Belgium, where he developed a realistic style that state authorities favored for a series of posters to promote Polish tourism in the mid-192os. Norblin featured heroic portrayals of Polish types—a miner from Silesia, men and women in folk dress from Łowicz, and a mountaineer in traditional costume from Zakopane (Fig. 25.13). Tadeusz Trepkowski (1914–1954), who studied at the Graphics Industry School and the Municipal School of Decorative Art and Painting in Warsaw, introduced a new dramatic element to poster design in a series of posters on social themes that he did in the late 193os. His intense visual statements derived their impact from terse copy lines combined with forceful images such as a bandaged hand set against a torn phototograph of clenched fists and hammers on a poster that advocated more care in the workplace to avoid accidents.

The graphic design profession received a boost in 1933 when Gronowski and ten other designers acted on an initiative from Edmund Bartłomiejcyzk to form the Circle of Graphic Advertising Artists (KAGR), an organization that quickly grew in size. The KAGR promoted the work of its members through exhibitions and competitions around Poland. Some KAGR members were also involved with a monthly journal, Reklama (Advertising), that discussed current issues related to design.

With the well developed courses in lettering in Poland's art and architecture schools, poster designers and other commercial artists were able to produce elegant and original texts for their posters and other graphic work by hand. There was little advance in the design of printing types except for Antykwa Półtawskiego (Półtawski Antiqua), a typeface drawn in 1928 by Adam Jerzy Półtawski (1881-1952), who also designed independent Poland's first banknote. Like Oldřich Menhart in Czechoslovakia, Półtawski designed a typeface that he believed was suitable for setting in his own language. This meant creating special forms for certain letters that otherwise seemed distorted when printed. While some felt that Półtawski Antiqua, which a Warsaw foundry originally cast in 193ı, contributed to the creation of a modern Polish style in book design, others thought that some of the letters, particularly the italics, were not well developed. However, after World War II, the Polish state type foundry redrew and cast Półtawski Antiqua, which