Germany, a new independent republic was established in 1919, following the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It was, however, a mixed blessing and failed to satisfy all the factions whose interests ranged from reviving the Hapsburg monarchy to uniting with Germany. Neither of these suited the ruling European powers and the formation of an independent democratic government became the Austrians' most realistic opportunity.

Amidst widespread poverty and social chaos, a new government formed and over the next several years managed to stabilize the economy, which made economic reconstruction viable. Though a moderate party ruled the national legislature, socialists controlled the government of Vienna, thus prompting the name "Red Vienna" for Austria's largest city. However, both the socialists and the ruling moderates in the national legislature shared an antipathy to Soviet communism and took strong measures to reduce the power of the Austrian Communist Party. Distinctive election posters for the socialists in 192o were designed by a Hungarian, Mihály Biro (1886–1948), who, before coming to Vienna, was active as a poster artist in Budapest where he supported the short-lived regime of the communist Béla Kun.

## Building a socialist culture in Vienna

The working class, which had been nearly invisible during the years when bourgeois culture—the Vienna Secession, Adolf Loos, and Sigmund Freud—determined Vienna's identity, now became a major force in the creation of a new urban cultural life. Central to the program of the Austrian Socialist Party (SDAP), also known as Austro-Marxists, was an active program of social housing, which resulted in the construction of almost 70,000 new domiciles between 1919 and 1934, of which almost 59,ooo were in apartment blocks. Unlike Germany, where an ambitious housing program was allied with new forms of modern architecture, those in charge of the Viennese housing program chose a mélange of outmoded styles that seemed to confirm the workers' Viennese identity rather than ally them with an international modern movement. One of the largest and most fortress-like of these "people's palaces" was the Karl-Marx-Hof, that the city planner Karl Ehn (1884- 1957), a former student of Otto Wagner, designed.

Despite the monumentalism of the building exteriors, however, the interiors tended to be quite small. The municipality established the Vienna Household Furnishings Company to provide furniture for the new dwellings. The company sold pieces that it designed itself as well as mass-produced furniture from other sources. Socialist Party publications praised the modular furniture units that were intended for the new apartments, but they were too expensive for many people, who had to make do with the larger pieces of furniture they brought from their previous tenement dwellings. To complement the new small domiciles, the housing projects included communal facilities such as laundries, bathhouses, medical clinics, libraries, kindergartens, and shops. There were considerable debates in the press about the advantages of collective facilities such as communal kitchens, but the Viennese workers rejected such proposals, preferring instead the conventional layouts of traditional dwellings. They also preferred more traditional kitchens and the mechanized Frankfurt kitchen, designed by an Austrian architect, Greta Schütte-Lihotsky, although she was an Austrian, was absent from the Viennese housing designs as well.

Through the creation of a total working-class culture, the Austrian Socialist Party sought to mold its members into new types of human beings. Important components of this culture were the party's many publications, including daily newspapers, periodicals, and books. Without designers of John Heartfield's caliber, they tended to lack distinction. One of the illustrated magazines, Der Kuckuck, followed the model of the German photographic weekly, the Arbeiter Illustrierter Zeitung, encouraging an Austrian movement of worker photographers just as the AIZ had in Germany.