## Otto Neurath's pictorial statistics

The most significant cultural legacy of the Viennese Austro-Marxist program during the 192os and early 193os was the system of pictorial statistics devised by Otto Neurath (1892-1945), a philosopher, sociologist, and economist, for his Gesellschafts-und Wirtschaftsmuseum (Museum of Society and Economy). Funded by the municipality of Vienna, the museum's purpose was to publicize information about economic and social phenomena through pictorial charts. Neurath critiqued the Socialist Party's preference for the verbal rather than the visual, as evidenced in its extensive publishing program, and he believed that the workers could be better informed through a rational display of pictorial information.

To achieve this he developed strict rules for the visual display of social data. A major contribution to the tradition of statistical displays was not to represent quantities with figures of different sizes but rather to establish a uniform size and then multiply the number of figures to achieve a representation of the desired quantity. For easy reading he chose flat two-dimensional figures and used color to distinguish different types of figures. For the texts, he selected Paul Renner's Futura type because of its clarity. Neurath's system was first of all a product of his desire as a socialist to provide the working class with a view of the world that could be easily grasped through pictorial means. Second, as a philosopher involved in the Viennese Neo-Positivist movement that identified rationality as the core of philosophic discourse, he strove to describe the world in a clear and orderly way through visual techniques.

To produce the large number of charts that he displayed in the museum and contributed to exhibitions elsewhere, Neurath assembled a team with a distinct set of functions. Marie Reidemeister (1898–1986), a mathematician and physicist, was the museum's "transformer" whose job was to gather statistical data on a given subject and then distill it down to a cluster of facts that could be illustrated with pictorial statistics. Eventually she became Neurath's wife and lifelong collaborator.

In 1929, Neurath hired the German artist Gerd Arntz (1902-1988), who codified the style of the pictorial figures. They became progressively more abstract yet allowed for distinctions of differences in ethnicity, religion, or profession. Arntz also devised figures to represent industrial and agricultural products.

What came to be called the Vienna Method of Pictorial Statistics received wider recognition with the publication of the Society and Economy Atlas in 1930 (Fig. 25.19). Consisting of 100 pictorial charts and 30 text tables, the atlas served as a visual encyclopedia of historical and contemporary facts related to population, trade, technology, labor, and other social phenomena.

In 1934, when a contract with the Soviet Union to establish an ISOTYPE Institute there ended, Neurath, with Marie Reidemeister and several others including Gerd Arntz, emigrated to the Netherlands where they established an institute called the Mundaneum to further promote the use of the Vienna Method, which was renamed the International System of Typographic Picture Education or ISOTYPE in 1935.

## Design for the middle class

Despite the active development of Vienna's workingclass housing program, the central government chose to ignore it when determining its participation in the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs in Paris. It decided instead to fall back on the Viennese reputation for the production of luxury goods. Josef Hoffmann, a founder of the Vienna Workshops, supervised the extensive complex of buildings and exhibits. He designed the main pavilion, which he fashioned in a spare classical style to which he had reverted following the groundbreaking modernism of his pre-war Purkersdorf Sanitorium and Palais Stoclet. Despite the lavishness of the Austrian exhibits, they did not engage the French public and were criticized at home as a colossal failure. Many of the objects on display were designed by the Vienna Workshops and by Hoffmann's students from the School of Applied Arts. The Workshops had experienced a financial crisis in 1914. Reorganized as a