domestic culture), a name used to describe a kind of comfortable modern interior that served as an alternative to the colder industrialized counterparts with tubular steel furniture in Germany.

It was actually an Austrian furniture company, Thonet, that dominated the European market in tubular steel furniture. From its beginning in the 183os, Thonet had produced bentwood furniture but then entered into the production of tubular steel pieces in the late 192os. In 1922, Thonet, which had been privately held since its inception, joined the world's largest furniture conglomerate Kohn-Mundus, then located in Zurich. The firm continued to operate independently and remained one of Austria's largest exporters of finished goods, even though it also had manufacturing facilities abroad, notably in Germany and the United States.

Thonet experienced a bentwood revival during the 192os, in part because of the chairs' spare designs, which complemented the new modern aesthetic. The bentwood furniture received an additional impetus from Le Corbusier, who used it in his early interiors and considered its design to be classic. Thonet furniture was also widely seen in various interiors at the 1927 Weissenhof housing exhibition in Stuttgart. At home, Thonet continued to produce new models that were created in-house, but also began to commission wellknown architects to design chairs for them. Of these, most were done by architects abroad, but Josef Frank also designed one.

In 1929, Thonet sponsored a chair competition in Vienna to elicit new bentwood designs. Of 4,ooo entries, however, the distinguished jury found little to admire, recognizing that the company's best bentwood designs may have been its earliest ones. Around the same time, Thonet began to produce other types of furniture in tubular steel along with heavily upholstered club chairs and couches. The mainstay of Thonet's business, however, was the institutional market for which it made many types of furnishings for schools, theaters, and retail spaces. By 1938, after the Nazis had occupied Austria, much of Thonet's production had shifted to

Germany or the United States. Due to the ensuing war and the destruction it wrought, Thonet would have to completely rebuild its European operations after the end of hostilities in 1945.

## The Austrian Werkbund

The Austrian Werkbund, an offshoot of its parent association in Germany, was founded in 1912 but was far less active than its German counterpart. After an initial flurry of activity, which included hosting the German Werkbund's 1912 congress in Vienna, the Austrian branch became mired in disagreements, which effectively paralyzed it until the late 192os. One major difference between the Austrians and the Germans was that the Austrians did not share the Germans' interest in uniting art and industry. Austria had never embraced industrialization, and the Werkbund members fell back on what had always been Austria's rationale for this quality was more important than quantity and quality could best be attained by supporting fine craftsmanship rather than mass production.

Around 1928, Joseph Frank led a move to reinvigorate the association, which resulted in the selection of new leadership. But Frank was unclear about what direction the revived Werkbund should take, although he was certain that it should retain a strong commitment to the handicrafts. In 193o, the Austrian Werkbund decided to create a model housing estate similar to the 1927 Weissenhof exhibition in Stuttgart, which had been organized by its German counterpart.

Under the direction of Frank, the project was completed in 1932. As in Suttgart, both Austrian and international architects were invited to participate. These included Adolf Loos (1870-1933) and Richard Neutra (1892-1970) from Austria, Gerrit Rietveld from the Netherlands, Hugo Häring (1882–1958) from Germany, and André Lurçat (1894–1970) from France.

Frank had contributed to the design of some of the high-density worker housing that was supported by the socialist-dominated municipality in Vienna and