he was extremely dissatisfied with it. He conceived the Werkbund estate as an alternative, although the focus on single-family homes was directed to the middle class rather than the workers. The challenge of the program was to extract the maximum comfort from a minimum of space, although the definition of what was minimal would have seemed quite ample to the planners of the working-class housing blocks.

The construction of the estate was the Austrian Werkbund's last positive act. Following its completion, a growing right-wing nationalist group within the association, surely emboldened by Hitler's election as the German chancellor, began to protest against its Jewish members such as Josef Frank. A number of the right-wingers resigned and many reunited in a new group led by Josef Hoffmann. By the end of 1933, the Austrian Werkbund had split into two camps: the "Old Werkbund," consisting almost exclusively of socialists and Jews, and the "New Werkbund," whose conservative and Roman Catholic members followed Hoffmann and several others like him. By early 1934, the"New Werkbund" had become the official New Austrian Werkbund, purged of all Jews and leftists. Its two vice-presidents were the prominent architectdesigners Joseph Hoffmann and Peter Behrens.

The division within the Werkbund mirrored the larger split between the socialists and the emerging right wing in Austrian society. In early 1934, all political parties were abolished except the conservative Fatherland Front. Several months later an authoritarian constitution was put in place and Austria became a federal state rather than a republic. In 1938, the Nazis invaded the country, which was incorporated into the rapidly expanding Third Reich.

## Commercial art

Austria's strongest activity in the graphic arts before World War I was not in the commercial sector as in Germany but rather in the sphere of culture. Dense intricately-lettered posters by Kolo Moser and Alfred Roller for the Secession exhibitions and artistic posters for the Cabaret Fledermaus and the Kunstschau by Berthold Löffler (1874-196o) defined the Viennese visual style of the pre-war years (see Chapter 12).

After the war, however, it was the German sachplakat or "fact poster" that most strongly influenced the development of commercial art in Austria, particularly in Vienna. The strongest proponent of the sachplakat was Julius Klinger (1876-1942), who had worked as a commercial designer in Berlin from 1897 to 191. He, Lucian Bernhard, and others created the sachplakat, particularly through the commissions they undertook for the Berlin lithography firm Hollerbaum & Schmidt.

Following World War I, Klinger opened a commercial art studio in Vienna, where he also taught modern advertising art. However, more students studied graphic art at the School of Applied Arts, where their teachers included some of the major artists of the Vienna Secession. Alfred Roller was head of the school and Berthold Löffler among others taught art classes. Rudolf von Larisch (1856–1934), the specialist in lettering whose writings had strongly influenced the Secession poster artists, taught both at the School of Applied Arts and the Graphische Lehr und Versuchsanstalt (Graphic Education and Research Institute).

Klinger was opposed to the Secession style, espousing instead an aesthetic of simplicity that he believed to be in accord with Adolf Loos's ideas. Like Lucian Bernhard, he favored flat colored forms instead of modeling, and his advertising posters featured strong images and prominent lettering instead of detailed anecdotal scenes. Besides posters, he designed stationery, trademarks, advertisements, and packaging, demonstrating to other commercial artists the variety of commissions they might undertake. Klinger was skilled at lettering as well as drawing and the roman alphabet with spiky serifs that he designed and used for many of his posters was later developed into a typeface. One of his strongest campaigns was for Tabu, a firm that produced cigarette papers. Beginning in 1918, he popularized the company's products with designs that ranged from small newspaper announcements to large billboards and wall paintings. Like many Viennese, Klinger had a sharp wit, which was often evident in his posters such as one for Olleschau, another producer of cigarette papers, where the O becomes a leitmotif in the construction of the humorous trademark figure's body as well as in the smoke rings he is blowing.

Klinger was a great promoter of Viennese commercial art. In 1923, he founded a group of designers called the Vienna Group. Among its members were Willy Willrab, who later moved to Germany, Herman Kosel (1896-1983), and Rolf Frey (dates unconfirmed). For a time Kosel and Frey ran a joint studio until Frey moved to Germany around 1926. The group espoused modernity particularly through their appreciation of Charlie Chaplin, the French fashion illustrations of Charles Martin, and the acerbic wit of their own countryman, Karl Kraus.

The same year that Klinger established the Vienna Group, he found a publisher in Chicago to produce a book of their work. Entitled Poster Art in Vienna, the book's beautiful color reproductions helped to spread their reputation although it did not appear to attract American clients in any number nor did it have any significant impact on commercial artists in the United States.

The artists in the Vienna Group worked in a style that was similar to Klinger's although there were also differences. Some of Willrab's posters, for example, featured large three-dimensional letters that became dominant shapes. Kosel-Frey remained closer to Klinger, drawing heavily on the German caricature style of Simplissimus and Die Lustige Blätter, although in the 193os, Kosel won a prize for a poster in a more somber style that presented Vienna as a tourist destination. Besides the artists in the Vienna Group, others were also strongly influenced by the German sachplakat. Posters of Heinrich Blechner (1895-1983) for Odol mouthwash, and Alexander Exax (1896– 1994) for Steyr ball bearings are good examples. Hans Wagula (1894–1964) produced similar work but also became known for his travel posters, which depicted inviting views of vacation spots in strong flat colors. Austrian commercial artists also had a rich resource for expressive letters in Rudolf von Larisch's multiple volumes of lettering examples, which he gathered from artists throughout Europe. Published between 19oo and 1909, these books remained a strong source of ideas for decorative lettering styles even though many poster artists had begun to favor a plainer san serif letter by the late 1920s.

The most important commercial artist in Austria in the generation after Klinger was Josef Binder (1898– 1972), who had served a brief apprenticeship with a printing and publishing house in Vienna and attended classes at the School of Applied Art after the war. He opened his own studio in 1922 and began immediately to work in a modern style. Like Klinger, he designed trademarks and other advertising material besides posters. An excellent draftsman, his roots were in freehand drawing and his work never reflected the style of humorous drawings that was frequently evident in the work of Klinger and Kosel-Frey, for example. Binder was one of the first commercial artists to produce drawings with an airbrush, which until the 192os had been used primarily for retouching photographs.

One of his memorable creations was a 1924 poster for Meinl coffee that featured a small brownskinned boy with a fez sipping the brew. Known as the Meinl moor, this image, which conveyed the exotic Ethiopian origin of the product, became the company's logo and has been updated a number of times over the years (Fig. 25.2o). In another poster, for Meinl tea, Binder conveyed its Asian origin by depicting a Chinese junk manned by a boatman in a coolie hat. His work for Julius Meinl was complemented by that of Otto Exinger (1897–1957), a poster designer who joined Meinl's in-house design studio in 1926. Exinger later became the studio's director and continued to supervise the company's advertising until his death in 1957.