of territory, population, and industry due to the Treaty of Trianon, signed with the Western powers in 192o. Hungary was also isolated from the victors of World War I and consequently did not participate in the 1925 Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, an event that intensely focused applied arts activity in Czechoslovakia and Poland. In spite of difficulties, there were positive achievements in particular sectors of Hungarian industry due to the strong vision and management of individual companies.

## Art and industry in the Austro-Hungarian Empire (Dual Monarchy)

By 19oo, Hungary had long recognized the importance of the applied arts and established some of the institutions that were necessary to foster their growth. As part of the Dual Monarchy, Hungary was also influenced by the applied arts in Vienna, which were highly developed in the years before World War I, as well as the applied arts in Munich, Berlin, and Paris, where a large number of Hungarians studied.

It was actually the Deutscher Werkbund that stimulated the formation of a Hungarian group to improve the quality of Hungarian goods. The Werkbund's activities were first reported in Hungary by the president of the National Society for Industry, who proposed the establishment of an Industrial Arts Center to foster quality industrial production and provide a place where craftsmen could market their products. Although that plan did not come to fruition, the news of the Werkbund did stimulate the founding of a comparable group in Budapest, Magyar Müvészi Munka (Hungarian Quality Work Society), which was inaugurated in 1913, the same year as the Austrian Werkbund. The society's charter stated the hope of the founders to raise the quality of industrial products through the cooperation of artists, industrialists, and craftsmen. It also signaled their wish to align their objectives and activites with the German and Austrian Werkbunds and expressed the hope that their association might be known abroad as the Hungarian Werkbund. Founding members included architects and applied artists such as Ödon Lechner (1845–1945), Hungary's leading Art Nouveau architect; the architect József Vago (1877-1947); and Lajos Kozma (1884-1948), an architect who became one of Hungary's major designers of shop facades, interiors, furniture, and books as well as a prominent design educator. However, with war imminent, there was little opportunity for the new society to launch a program, nor did anything come of it directly after the war.

Though its representation at foreign exhibitions before World War I emphasized Hungary's folk heritage, the monarchy had a number of enterprises such as the aforementioned Ganz & Company that were quite advanced in engineering and the manufacture of industrial products. Around 1908, two factories began to produce small delivery vans for the Hungarian Postal Authority, both using engines designed by the mechanic and inventor János Csonka (1852-1939), who is credited with the design of the first Hungarian automobile in 1902. The box-like vans differed little in design from the touring cars of the day, but the idea of using the rear section for storage was novel and Hungary was one of the first countries in Europe to motorize mail delivery. In 19o8, Csonka also began to build small experimental cars that the Postal Authority purchased to collect mail. Though hardly a match for the superior designs of cars from abroad, some were nonetheless adapted as passenger vehicles. Hungarian-made cars produced by MARTA Hungarian Automobile Ltd also replaced the horse-drawn carriages of Hungary's major taxi company. As well, MARTA competed successfully for a contract from the city of Budapest to build double-decker city buses following the London model. A number were completed, but after World War I, Romania annexed the region where the MARTA factory was located and the factory ceased to operate.

Though high-end furniture in Hungary during the Dual Monarchy tended towards heavy