ornamentation and a Neo-Baroque style, a furniture company owned by Sándor Buchwald (1837-1919) produced simple folding chairs and tables, along with stationary benches, for gardens and parks. 'The pieces he designed consisted of metal frames with either wood or metal slats for the seats and backs. The different designs were variations on basic models although Buchwald's ability to use some of the same parts in different models does not appear to have been as well thought out as it was by the Thonet company, whose furniture was primarily for indoor use.

## The graphic arts before independence

Given the modest size of the market for mass-produced books, advances in their design were limited. The revival of Hungarian book printing began in the 188os when the middle classes started to demand higher quality in its printed matter. A major journal that adopted a new design format was the literary magazine Nyugat (West), which was founded in 19o8. It published both poetry and prose in a range of styles from symbolism and naturalism to impressionism. Elek Falus (1884-195o), who combined motifs from Art Nouveau with elements of Hungarian folk art, designed the title page and some covers, as well as the covers of books the journal published.

Art Nouveau was also highly influential in the early development of the Hungarian poster although sources ranged widely from Jules Chéret to Lucian Bernhard and the caricaturists of Simplicissimus. Árpád Basch (1873-1944), who studied art in Munich and Paris, brought a naturalistic sensibility to poster design, but he was also extremely attentive to lettering and its relation to an image. The poster designer who best conveyed a picture of the Hungarian middle class under the Dual Monarchy and after Horthy came to power was Géza Faragó (1877-1928), who had studied with Alfonse Mucha in Paris. His posters featured stylishly dressed men and women enjoying the comforts of middle-class life. Faragó was essentially an illustrator who added lettering to his images as in his well-known poster for Törley Champagne, which depicts an effete young man in evening dress smoking a cigarette while his champagne glass, gloves, and a drooping rose rest on a nearby table (Plate 29).

## The applied arts in the interwar years

Following the collapse of Béla Kun's short-lived Communist republic, artists and intellectuals left Hungary in large numbers. Many went to Vienna, where the Socialist government offered some compatibility, and others departed for Germany. László Moholy-Nagy joined the avant-garde milieu in Berlin and after several years was called to Weimar to become a member of the Bauhaus faculty. Before Moholy arrived at the school, many Hungarian students had already been drawn to the Bauhaus. Some formed an alliance they called the KURI group, which lobbied for the appointment of Moholy-Nagy to the faculty after Johannes Itten left. Though many of the Hungarian students distinguished themselves at the school, Marcel Breuer is the one who is best known because of his innovative furniture designs and the fact that he became a teacher there following his tenure as a student.

One of the Hungarians who spent time in Weimar without actually enrolling in the Bauhaus was Sándor Bortnyik (1893-1976), a painter active in Hungarian avant-garde circles before he left Hungary after the Communist coup. When Bortnyik returned home in 1925, he was unable to obtain any state commissions because of his prior left-wing activity. He began to work as an independent graphic designer, producing posters, book covers, and other printed materials, and in 1928 he founded a small school, Mühely (Workshop), which he kept going for ten years with a staff of part-time teachers. The program was based on Bauhaus ideas and the most advanced thinking of the avant-garde in other countries. The part of the program that produced the most visible results was graphic design, which is the field that Bortnyik himself was working in at the time. Among the students at the Műhely was Gyorgy Kepes (1906–2001), who later worked in Berlin as an assistant to Moholy-Nagy and then had a distinguished career as a visual arts educator in the United States. Another prominent alumnus was the painter Victor Vasarely, who was associated with the international op art movement.

Under the conservative cultural policies of the Horthy regime, modern design such as Bortnyik espoused at the Múhely received no public support. However, modernism was evident to some degree in the design of occasional commercial interiors and store facades such as Lajos Kozma's Budapest fashion house interior of 1928 and his Apostol Pharmacy of 1929, both done in an Art Deco style. As a furniture designer during the 192os, Kozma adopted an ornate aesthetic. One critic dubbed his mixture of swirling Baroque elements and refined folk art motifs "Kozma Baroque." Kozma's designs, however, were part of a broader craft ethos that was also evident in selected furniture, ceramics, and textiles by others. In the mid-193os, this ethos gained wide currency through the designs of Kató Lukáts (1900-1990), notably the candy wrappers and boxes she created for the Frigyes Stühmer Company,

Though Hungary experienced no modern movement equivalent to Functionalism in Czechoslovakia, there was a gradual shift in the late 192os towards a more Functional approach to furniture. A major participant in this shift was the furniture factory owned by Károly and János Lingel. Known for its office furniture in the American style, the company began to manufacture a line of modular utility home furniture after 1927. Marketed under the name Varia, their line consisted of 14 types of modular units that could generate an enormous number of permutations and combinations.

The shift to more Functional furniture was also stimulated by the founding of the progressive architecture and design magazine Tér és Forma (Space and Form), which appeared in 1928 and continued publication until 1945. It was supported as well by the debates around minimum living space that had been occurring within CIAM, and which included

Hungarian participants. The Hungarian CIAM group also organized two exhibitions that explored aspects of collective living and public low-cost housing. Both topics challenged the policies of the Horthy government, which responded to the second exhibition by sending the police to shut it down.

At the Budapest Furniture Fair in 1931, Lajos Kozma introduced a spring-backed chair for massproduction that could be made with considerable variations. It was put into production by the Jószef Heisler Furniture Factory and was available in different materials including a choice of wooden or steel-plate frames. Shortly thereafter Kozma created several pieces of tubular steel furniture for another manufacturer, thus solidifying his move from Baroque ornamentalist to modern designer.

In 1932, Kozma helped establish the Magyar Mühely-Szövetség (Hungarian Workshop Alliance), an organization better known by its alternative name, the Hungarian Werkbund. Like its predecessor, the Hungarian Quality Work Society, which was founded in 1913, the aim of the Hungarian Workshop Alliance was to improve the quality of industrial goods. By this time the Deutscher Werkbund—equally the model for its 1913 and 1932 Hungarian counterparts—had also become involved with the improvement of modern living spaces and household furnishings. It did so through its sponsorship of the Weissenhof Siedlung in 1927, a project that would influence the activities of the new Hungarian Alliance. Others besides Kozma who were active in the Alliance's founding included Farkas Molnár (1897–1945), an architect who had been part of the Bauhaus community and then later helped organize the Hungarian CIAM delegation; Sándor Bortnyik; the ceramist Géza Gorka (1894-1971); the artist Anna Lesznai (1885–1956); and the publisher Imre Kner (1890–1945).

As with its predecessor organization, the activity of the Hungarian Workshop Alliance was interrupted by war before it had a chance to fully develop its program. It was, however, able to mount several