exhibitions, support the annual Budapest Furniture Fair with work by its members, and participate in additional exhibitions as well. Despite its other activities that included lectures and publications, historian Gyula Ernyey believes that the Alliance did not have a significant influence on Hungarian architecture or design as its counterpart, the Deutscher Werkbund, had on German culture from its founding in 1907 until Hitler came to power in 1933. However, Hungary's participation in the major world's fairs of the 193os, for example the Milan Triennale in 1933 and the Paris World's Fair in 1937, evoked positive commentaries by historians and critics of the period.

## The industrial sector

Even though the Hungarian economy performed poorly during the interwar years, a modest culture of invention had formed during the years of the Dual Monarchy and enabled the development of a few strong companies, particularly in the fields of telecommunications and transportation. The 192os saw a constantly rising demand for radio sets whose numbers increased from 17,000 in 1925 to 420,000 by 1938. The Orion Electric Company, a leading manufacturer of radios, was established in 1913 as the Wolfram Lamp Factory before it changed its name in 1923. Following the name change, József Bottlik (1897-1984), an artist who had turned to commercial art, designed a logo for Orion consisting of the company name, a jagged line that looked like radio waves, and three heads of speaking figures. Bottlik was conscious of the company's need to have a dignified visual identity and worked on its image throughout his career. The designs for the radio cabinets were conservative, changing little from year to year except for the size of the models and the location of the speakers and dials. Essentially, they were polished wooden boxes with mesh fabric to cover the speakers. The larger ones were free-standing furniture pieces that combined phonographs with the radios. As a local company, Orion faced stiff competition from the Dutch conglomerate Philips, which manufactured many other products besides radios. Philips's chief designer in Hungary was Dezsö Bozzay (1912-1974), whose radio housings of polished wood had a clean simplified appearance, exemplified by the Europa Star of 1936.

In automobile design, Hungary produced no car like the Czech Skoda or Tatra that could reach a significant market. Instead, cars manufactured by the MAG company between 191 and 1934 tended to be heavy and somewhat behind the latest developments. One of the MAG engineers, Jenő Fejes (1877–1952), left the firm in 1917 to start his own enterprise, the Fejes Plate Engine Manufacturing Company. His intention was to manufacture cars with a new steel plate engine that he invented and to build up the entire car with pressed and welded iron sheets. Costs for production were well below other cars in the domestic market and the design of the car body was decent. But the company was undercapitalized and had to cease operations in 1931.

Hungary was ,more successful in the design of railroad engines, building on the exemplary achievements of Ganz & Company since the late 19th century. Kálman Kandó (1869-1931) rejoined the staff of the Ganz factory in 1917 after some years working in Italy. His aim was to construct a second generation of electric railways that would enable the alternating current produced in Hungary to provide the power for the nation's railroads. In 1929, MÁV, the Hungarian National Railway, electrified one of its main lines for which Kandó designed two new electric locomotives, one for fast trains and one for slow. Their plain box shapes, which differed from the more traditional forms of the steam locomotives, were also designed by Kandó, who was equally at home with the engineering and the aesthetic aspects of his machines.

MAV worked as well on a streamlined steam locomotive, MÁV No. 242. In the early 193os, it was one of many being designed in various countries. Put into service in 1936, it had an attractive somewhat swept-back form, although compared with the bulletnosed shapes of its American counterparts by Henry Dreyfuss and Raymond Loewy, its design was on