Kner. The two represented their typographic views in several small volumes, which one critic dubbed the Three Tiny Books." These featured Hungarian folk tales and stories that were printed with ornaments and hand-colored woodcut illustrations by Kozma. The collaboration of Kner and Kozma was strongest in the early 192os, when Kner published several series of well-known Hungarian texts and classics of world literature, all with woodcut initials, devices, and illustrations based on Kozma's drawings. In the late 192os, the Bodoni typeface became available in Hungary and Kner changed his design philosophy to accommodate its modern, though still classical, characteristics. Given his influence among book publishers, a number of others followed suit.

## Yugoslavia

Following World War I, the Paris Peace Conference that the victorious nations organized in 1919 divided up the Balkans to create a new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. It was intended to unite a more heterogeneous group of territories than existed anywhere else in Central Europe. During the interwar years, the diversity of this new nation was sustained only with enormous effort. The initial constitution established a highly centralized state in which an elected assembly and a Serbian king jointly held legislative power. After a decade of struggle, King Alexander I discontinued the parliament and declared a royal dictatorship. At the time he also changed the name of the country to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Though he promised to unite the population, he failed to do so, nor did he do much to improve the weak economy. In 1934, a group of Croatian nationalists assassinated him, and Milan Stojadinović, a former finance minister, became the new premier. Stojadinović replaced many of the king's accomplices, loosened the censorship laws, and began to address the country's economic problems. He remained in office until 1939, when the Prince Regent replaced him partly because he was unable to negotiate successfully with the Croatians and partly because he sought to create his own group of followers, following Mussolini's tactics by calling them Green Shirts instead of the Duce's Black Shirts.

Although Yugoslavia was endowed with natural resources, the territories it contained had little industry when they were first united nor did they develop much more in the interwar years. There were a few textile factories but the country's economic policy was based primarily on trading raw materials for finished goods, first with Italy and then after 1935 with Germany, which became its main trading partner. This relationship was disrupted in 1941 when Germany invaded Yugoslavia.

## Commercial and applied arts before 1919

Among the peoples who were joined together as the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, the Croats and Slovenes had a particularly strong relation with Western Europe. Both had been subject to the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary, with Slovenia being controlled by the Austrians, and Croatia ruled by the Hungarians. Zagreb was the cultural capital of Croatia, while Ljubljana and Belgrade were the cultural centers in Slovenia and Serbia respectively.

At the beginning of the 2oth century, Zagreb was an important center for the decorative arts. A Museum of Arts and Crafts, founded to defend the crafts against the incursion of industrialization, opened in 1879. It was designed by the architect Herman Bollé (1845-1926), who also founded Croatia's first school of applied arts, the Royal County Craft School, in 1882. As an architect, Bollé designed a number of important churches in Zagreb as well as the important Mirogoj Cemetery, but he also believed strongly in the applied arts and fostered Croatia's involvement in many exhibitions leading up to the 19oo Exposition Universelle in Paris. Serbia too fostered participation in international fairs. Following its participation in the same Paris exhibition, its pavilion for the 191 Turin exhibition was designed in a Byzantine style