structures of Rodchenko and other Constructivist designers.

In the same department, Alexei Filippov (dates unconfirmed) was the most influential teacher. Though Filippov had trained at the old Stroganov School of Applied Art, he rejected decoration in favor of clean simple forms. The Textile Department was rather conservative, despite the brief Constructivist influence of Varvara Stepanova. Among the student textile designs were a number that featured illustrative political iconography such as the hammer and sickle as decorative motifs. The Graphic Arts Department was dominated in its early years by Vladimir Favorsky who taught book printing, specializing in woodcut illustrations combined with traditional typography for the design of books and journals. Another professor, Nikolai Kuprianov (1894-1933), was sympathetic to the innovative graphic style of the Constructivists and introduced a more experimental approach to typography and publication design. As a result, a few graduates from the department such as Solomon Telingater (1903-1969) and Nikolai Prusakov (1900– 1952) later gained prominence as designers of books and posters.

By the time the school closed in 193o, the Soviet Union was well into the First Five-Year Plan, whose thrust was the development of large-scale industrial enterprises rather than consumer industries for which the Vkhutemas designers were being trained. Various departments became separate entities such as the Moscow Graphics Institute and the Higher Architectural-building Institute, while others were joined to existing organizations.

## Fashion, Furniture, and Ceramics

As in most industries immediately following the revolution, the textile industry was short of materials and had to rely largely on cheap fabrics. Designers rejected the decorative flower patterns of pre-revolutionary textiles and sought designs that would be more expressive of the new Soviet state. In 1923, once the industry had stabilized, the Communist Party newspaper, Pravda, published an appeal for artists to work in the textile factories. Varvara Stepanova and Liubov Popova, both participants in the Constructivist debates in INKhUK, answered the call and established a design workshop in the First State Textile Print Factory in Moscow. Their interest in fabric design sprang from the decision in INKhUK to reject painting and work instead for industry.

Both Stepanova and Popova introduced patterns that came from an entirely new source: the experimental forms of the Constructivists and their theoretical approach to materials. The women created dynamic formal patterns, which usually featured two strong colors and occasionally black. Stepanova produced more than 15o designs of which about two dozen were put into production. In an article of 1923 entitled "Present Day Dress—Production Clothing, Stepanova discussed the design of clothing as if it were an industrial product. Not only did she espouse mass production rather than garments sewn by hand, but she also rejected the idea of clothing as adornment and decoration, promoting instead the appropriate garments for particular functions. She devised two main categories of clothing: prozodezhda (production clothing) for working, and sportodezhda (sports clothing) for relaxing (Plate o3). Popova also proposed garments that would incorporate her and Stepanova's geometric fabrics, but her designs were less rigid in their typology than Stepanova's and put more emphasis on elegance and graceful lines.

Stepanova and Popova came to fashion design directly from avant-garde art, but Nedezda Lamanova (1861–1941), who set up a Workshop on Contemporary Dress in 1918, had been a famous couturier and owner of a fashion house before the revolution. Lamanova took up the challenge to make functional and attractive clothing for the working class. Working with flimsy fabrics that were badly dyed with dull colors, she designed clothing with a clean cut and simple line that could be easily and inexpensively manufactured.

Besides the geometric textile designs of Stepnova and Popova, fabric designers, many of whom were graduates of the Vkhutemas, tended towards repeat patterns of pictorial images, although these varied in their degrees of abstraction or realism. Among the designers who favored abstraction was Ludmilla Mayakovskaya (1884-1963), sister of the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky. Mayakovskaya studied textile design before the revolution at the Stroganov School of Applied Art and subsequently worked in a silk factory where she learned a spray-gun technique. Though her style of the 192os was inspired by Constructivist geometry, her designs could also feature flowers or lightning as well as dynamic abstract patterns that were filled with bursts of light and energy. A dominant tendency of Soviet textile design in the 192os and 193os, however, was to create patterns with revolutionary icons of modernity such as airplanes or cars, factory workers, machine parts, or Red Army soldiers

The inability of Constructivist designs to transform the fashion or textile industry was equally true in the furniture field. After nationalization following the revolution, furniture factories and workshops reverted to private ownership with the inauguration of the NEP in 192I. Historian John Bowlt writes that as late as 1929 only one quarter of the furniture industry was controlled by state trusts such as Mosdrev, the Moscow wood trust, which had commissioned some designs for workers' club furniture from the Vkhutemas Derfak. In general, commercial furniture designers in the 192os produced little that was innovative or distinctive, despite the groundbreaking prototypes that were created at the Vkhutemas.

This is in sharp contrast to the radical new designs for buildings by Soviet architects such as Konstantin Melnikov (1890—1974), Nikolai Ladovsky (1881-1941), and Moisei Ginzburg (1892–1946). Although there were highly respectable precedents for commercial furniture before the revolution, the Arts and Crafts movement that centered on Sasha Mamontov's estate, Abramtsevo, and the estate of Princess Tenisheva at Talashkino had resulted in heavily decorated wooden furniture that derived from a romantic view of peasant life. Consequently, neither the forms nor the intensive labor process were appropriate for a society that was striving to reinvent itself as a modern industrial state. Instead, factories tended to rely more on a pre-revolutionary modern style that had been produced for a bourgeois market but was nonetheless easier to manufacture and more likely to sell than romanticized peasantinspired pieces. Despite the many good ideas that were generated at the Vhkutemas, the production of inexpensive furniture on a mass scale would have to wait until the 193os when it was driven by the need to support the massive worker-housing projects of the Five-Year Plans.

In ceramics, the Lomonosov Porcelain Factory in Leningrad (formerly Petrograd), where Sergei Chekhonin (1878–1936) had inaugurated an agitational style of chinaware following the revolution, remained a center of innovation in the early 192os. In 1923, two of Kazimir Malevich's students from the Vitebsk Art Institute, Nikolai Suetin (1897–1954) and Ilya Chashnik (1902-1929), followed their teacher to Leningrad and began to work at the factory. There they applied Suprematist designs to existing forms for teapots, cups, and saucers, adapting them to the curved surfaces of the objects (Fig. 20.1o). Malevich designed an experimental teapot and several cups but the forms were awkward and the objects were not produced. Chashnik left in 1924, but Suetin continued to work at the factory. In 1932 he became chief artist, a position he held until 1954.

The same year Suetin was promoted, the Hungarian ceramist Eva Stricker (1906-201) arrived in the Soviet Union and took a position in the Lomonosov Factory. She worked under Suetin, who applied Suprematist ornaments to some of her forms. A former Bauhaus student, Stricker subsequently gained international renown as Eva Zeisel. In 1934 she moved to a large ceramics factory in Moscow and shortly thereafter she was appointed Artistic Director for the Soviet Union's entire glass and china industry. She was