with interchangeable standardized units that could be arranged in multiple combination.

One of the leading Estonian graphic artists during this period was Peet Aren (1889-1970), a modern painter and woodcut artist who also created commercial art in many forms from menus to advertising posters. His colorful illustrations recalled work by late 19th-century artists such as Maxfield Parrish. He also specialized in lettering in several different styles that sometimes accompanied his drawings but was also featured in its own right (Fig. 25.28).

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

There is no general history of design in Central and Eastern Europe during this period, although some information can be found in general histories of art such as Timothy O. Benson, ed., Central European Avant-Gardes: Exchange and Transformation, 1910–1930; Dubravka Djurić and Miško Šuvaković, eds., Impossible Histories: Historical Avant-gardes, Neo-Avant-gardes, and Post-Avant-gardes in Yugoslavia, 1918–1991; and S. A. Mansbach, Modern Art in Eastern Europe: From the Baltic to the Balkans, ca. 1890-1939, Mansbach also edited a special issue of the Art Journal on the avant-gardes of Eastern Europe. See Art Journal 49, no. I (Spring 199o). David Crowley published an essay on “Art Deco in Central Europe," and Reino Liefkes on “Germany, Austria and the Netherlands," in Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton, and Ghislaine Wood, eds., Art Deco 1910-1939 and there is additional material on the topic in the catalog L'Art Deco en Europe. Czech modernism and the Czech avant-garde are covered extensively in a number of books and exhibition catalogs: Jaroslav Anděl, The New Vision for the New Czech Architecture, 1918–1938; El Arte de la Vanguardia en Checoslovaquia, 1918–1938/The Art of the Avant-Garde in Czechoslovakia, 1918–1938, the catalog of an exhibition at the IVAM in Valencia, Spain; Czech Functionalism, 1918–1938; Czech Modernism 1900–1945; Czech Photographic Avant-garde, 1918–1948;

Prague 1891–194I: Architecture and Design; and Prague, 1900–1938: Capitale secrète des avant-gardes.

Books and catalogs on specific Czech movements are Alexander von Vegesack, ed., Czech Cubism: Architecture, Furniture, and Decorative Arts 1910-1925 and Jiri Svestka and Tomás Vlcek, 1901-1925 Kubismus in Prag: Malerei Skulptur Kunstgewerbe Architektur, Devětsil: Ceska Vytvarna Avantgarda, the catalog of an exhibition in Prague; Devětsil: Czech Avant-Garde Art, Architecture, and Design of the 192os and 193os, the catalog of another exhibit in Oxford; and Art Deco Boemia, 1918–1938. Das Bauhaus im Osten; Slowakische und Tschechische Avantgarde 1928–1939, edited by Susanne Anna, contains a group of essays that discuss the Czech version of the Bauhaus in Bratislava. Iva Mojzisová provides additional material on the school in her article, "Avant-garde Repercussions and the School of Applied Arts in Bratislava, 1928-1939," Journal of Design History 5, no. 4 (1992). On Czech book design see The Czech Avant-Garde and Czech Book Design: The 1920s and 1930s, the special 1984 supplement to the journal Afterimage; The Czech Avant-Garde and the Book, 1900–1945; the special issue on Czechoslovakia in Fine Print: The Review for the Arts of the Book 13, no. 1 (January 1987); and Esther Levinger's article, "Czech Avant-Garde Art: Poetry for the Five Senses," Art Bulletin 81, no. 3 (September 1999). Books and catalogs dedicated to individual architects, designers or photographers include Vladimir Birgus and Jan Mlčoch, eds., Jaroslav Rössler: Czech Avant-Garde Photographer, Eric Dluhosch and Rostislav Svácha, Karel Teige 1900–1951: L'Enfant Terrible of the Czech Modernist Avant-Garde; Jan Kotěra, 1871-1923: The Founder of Modern Czech Architecture; Ladislav Sutnar: Prague — New York — Design in Action; and Jiři Mucha, Alphonse Maria Mucha; His Life and Art.

David Crowley's National Style and Nation-State: Design in Poland from the Vernacular Revival to the International Style is the essential text in English for the story of design in Poland from the turn of the century to the 193os. Further material on