Polish design can be found in the extensive volume Rzecy Pospolite, Polskie Wyroby, 1899-1999/Common Wealth, Polish Products, 1899-1999; Czesława Frejlich, ed., Out of the Ordinary: Polish Designers of the 2oth Century; and in the comprehensive study of the Cracow Workshops, Maria Dziedzec, ed., Warsztaty Krakowskie, 1913-1926/The Krakow Workshops, 1913-1926. Hilary Gresty's and Jeremy Lewison's catalog Constructivism in Poland, 1923-1936 provides thorough documentation of that wing of the Polish avant-garde. See also Esther Levinger, “Return to Figuration: Władislaw Strzeminski and the Move from Idealism," Art History 24, no. 1 (February 2ooi). The extensive literature on Polish posters includes Szymon Bojko, Polska Sztuka Plakatu; Das Polnische Plakat von 1892 bis Heute aus dem Sammlungen des Plakatmuseums Wilanów; Polski Plakat Filmowy: 100-Lecie Kina w Polsce 1896–1996/Polish Film Poster: rooth Anniversary of the Film Poster in Poland 1896–1996; and Polski Plakat Teatralny 1899-1999/Polish Theater Poster 1899–1999.

Design in Austria with the exception of the Wiener Werkstätte is not well documented. Jane Kallir, Viennese Design and the Wiener Werkstätte provides good coverage of the Werkstätte after the initial period as does Peter Noever, ed., Dagobert Peche and the Wiener Werkstätte. Helmut Gruber's Red Vienna: Experiment in Working-Class Culture, 1919-1934 by contrast addresses the large-scale construction of low-cost housing, while Christopher Long's excellent monograph Josef Frank: Life and Work provides helpful background material on Frank's design milieu besides discussing his own work. Nader Vossoughian's Otto Neurath: The Language of the Global Polis is a detailed biography of the Austrian founder of the ISOTYPE movement.

Gyula Ernyey, Made in Hungary: The Best of I5o Years in Industrial Design is an authoritative source of information on Hungarian industrial design. Juliet Kinchin discusses Hungarian furniture in "Modernity and Tradition in Hungarian Furniture, 1900-1938; Three Generations," The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 24 (2oo2). There is considerably more material, however, on the Hungarian avant-garde. See Lajos Kassák y la Vanguardia Húngara; S. A. Mansbach, Standing in the Tempest: Painters of the Hungarian Avant-Garde 1908-1930; and the Hayward Gallery catalog, The Hungarian Avant-Garde, The Eight, and The Activists. Rudolf Tökés provides background to the avant-garde's early difficulties in Hungary in Béla Kun and the Hungarian Soviet Republic: The Origins and Role of the Communist Party of Hungary in the Revolutions of 1918-1919. Éva Bajkay-Rosch writes about "Hungarians at the Bauhaus," in the volume of conference papers, ICSAC Cahier 6/7, 1987, while John Halas'"Encounter with Moholy-Nagy,"STA Journal I, no. 3 (Summer 198o), describes his own activity at Alexander Bortnyik's design school, the Mühely. On Hungarian posters, see Tibor Szántó, A Magyar Plakát, while György Haiman's article "Imre Kner and the Revival of Hungarian Printing," Design Issues 7, no. 2 (Spring 199ī) provides helpful material in English on this important Hungarian printer and publisher.

On other countries in the region, see Damjan Prelovšek's authoritative biography, Jože Plečnik: 1872–1957; Tom Sandqvist's study of Hungarian Dada, Dada East: The Romanians of Cabaret Voltaire; the special Yugoslav theme issue of The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 17 (Fall 1990); S. A. Mansbach with Wojciech Jan Siemaszkiewicz, Graphic Modernism From the Baltic to the Balkans 1910-1935; and Zelimir Koscevic's earlier article "The Poster in Yugoslavia," The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 10 (Fall 1988). Jüri Kermik, Lutheri Vabrik: Vineer ja Möbel, 1877–1940/ The Luther Factory: Plywood and Furniture, 1877–1940 is a detailed study of the Luther Furniture Factory in Estonian and English, while Leonhard Lapin's Eesti XX Sajandi Ruum /Space in 2oth Century also deals with furniture design as well as related topics.

## Books

## General

L’Art Deco en Europe. Bruxelles: Societé des Expositions du Palais des Beaux-Arts, 1989.