tableware with plain forms that was suitable for mass production. Ultimately his designs were produced for a wider market in stainless steel. Another prominent designer of silver was Kay Fisker (1893-1965), an architect rather than a silversmith. As a writer for the architectural journal Arkitekten (The Architect) between 1919 and 1927, Fisker promoted modern design through polemics, while as a designer for the manufacturer A. Michelsen, he produced silver tea services, cocktail shakers, and pitchers in pure sculptural forms with subtle historical associations. Fisker was less successful as a designer of furniture. His wingback chair of the 193os was an attempt to modernize the 18th- and 19th-century models by substituting curved wooden arms for the earlier upholstered ones and plain wooden legs for the more ornate legs of the earlier models.

The success that Georg Jensen had achieved before World War I (see Chapter 17) through his designs and those of Johan Rohde and other designers continued to ensure the firm's success in the interwar years. One of Jensen's leading designers during this period was Harald Nielsen (1892-1977), who created simple unadorned silver teapots and other hollow ware as well as flatware patterns. His Pyramid flatware of 1927, which featured a stepped design at the base of each piece of cutlery, recalled the forms of Art Deco and became one of the firm's best selling designs. When Georg Jensen died in 1935, the company was managed by his son Jørgen and continued its successful course.

A counterpart to Nielsen's plain unadorned forms in silver was the glassware that Jens Bang (1890-1965) designed for the Holmegaards Glasværk (Holmegaard Glass Factory) in the 192os. Bang joined Holmegaard's design office in 1924 and became its artistic director in 1928. The clear Purist forms that he designed for Holmegaard during the 192os were in marked contrast to the elaborately decorated glassware that Simon Gate and Edvard Hald were designing for Orrefors in Sweden at the time. Bang's Hogla beer glass of 1928, a beautifuly shaped sculptural vessel with a thick transparent stem and base, marked a turning point for

Holmegaard's shift to mass production. His Primula glassware of 193o played more with curved forms and varied stem shapes but still preserved the pristine sense of form that characterized his work with Holmegaard until he left in 1942.

## Industrial products

As in Sweden, Danish entrepreneurs, engineers, and informal designers were primarily responsible for the design of electrical goods and transportation during the interwar years. In 191o, the year Axel Wenner-Gren introduced his cylinder vacuum in Sweden, two Danish entrepreneurs, Peder A. Fisker (1875–1975) and H. M. Nielsen (1870–1954), patented a canister vacuum cleaner after founding a company to produce small electric motors four years earlier. The Nilfisk vacuum, which took its name from the company's founders, was the first portable vacuum cleaner of its type. It was regarded as a technological breakthrough because the designers condensed so much cleaning power into a small object. During the 193os, it took on a more elegant appearance in order to appeal to the housewives who were its primary users.

Fisker & Nielsen also produced a popular motorcycle, the Nimbus, which Peder Fisker designed. His first design, the Model A, was manufactured between 1919 and 1923. It was known as "The Stovepipe," because of its large rounded frame, which also functioned as a gas tank. A new Model B was basically the same machine with an improved front fork. The early models of the Nimbus were produced primarily for domestic consumption, though they never became big sellers because they cost almost as much as Henry Ford's Model T automobile. In 1934, Fisker's son Anders designed a more streamlined and longer-lasting version, the Model C, which was called "The Bumblebee" after the sound of its exhaust.

Bang & Olufsen, which in later years became the premier manufacturer of high-end sound equipment, was founded in 1925 by two engineers, Peter Boas Bang (1900-1957) and Andreas Grøn Olufsen (1897–1949).