As in other countries that the Nazis occupied, initiatives to design modern dwellings and household goods dwindled and only experienced a resurgence after Western Europe was liberated in 1945.

## Norway

Both Norway and Finland gained their independence considerably later than Sweden and Denmark, a factor that may account for a continuing influence of folk culture and National Romantic ideals in both countries at a time when the two older nations were more readily absorbing influences from abroad. Norway did not have its own design organization until 1918 when the Landsforbundet Norsk Brukskunst (Norwegian Society of Crafts and Design) was formed.

Through exhibitions, publications, and contacts with industry, the Landsforbundet became an important forum for design debates between the wars. Its president for the first several years was the architect Harald Aars (1875-1945) and its vice-chairman Jacob Tostrup Prytz (1886-1962), head of the firm Jacob Tostrup, a leading producer of household goods and jewelry in gold and silver. Prytz remained with the Landsforbundet for almost 30 years. Other members included Hans Aall (1869–1946), founder and director of the Norsk Folkemuseum (Norwegian Folk Museum), and Thor B. Kielland (1894–1963), an art historian who became curator of the Oslo Museum of Decorative Art in 1928, along with textile, furniture, and ceramics artists. As the late design historian Frederik Wildhagen has shown, topics of the initial debates within the Landsforbundet paralleled those occurring in Germany, Sweden, and Britain: notably how to produce attractive products for everyone and how to relate handicrafts to mass production. Initially the Landsforbundet supported a program similar to Gregor Paulsson's in Sweden. In 192o, it organized the exhibition "New Homes," a display of low-cost domestic environments that recalled the similar Swedish exhibition of several years earlier. By the mid-192os, its social program and its discussions of machine aesthetics had waned.

Neo-Classicism became the preferred form language as it was in Sweden, and the urban middle class the primary consumption community. In 1929, a group of craftoriented artists broke away from the Landsforbundet to form a new group, the Prydkunstnerlaget (Association of Decorative Artists), that wished to replace the emerging Neo-Classicism with a vernacular Norwegian tradition. The group also criticized the anonymous quality of mass production. and sought to relocate design in the crafts. From 1931, this group was known as the Brukskunstnerlaget (Association of Applied Artists) and that year it became a subgroup within the Landsforbundet Norsk Brukskunst.

Despite these turns, some designers and manufacturers chose to design and produce household wares in a modern style. Unlike Denmark, this was less the case in furniture than in ceramics and metalware. One exception among furniture designers was Herman Munthe-Kaas (1890-1977), whose cantilevered tubular steel armchair known as the “F-17"of 1929 followed closely the basic form of Marcel Breuer's Cesca chair of 1928. Munthe-Kaas added a softer seat and back support covered by fabric, though he retained Breuer's wooden arm rests.

In ceramics, Nora Gulbrandsen (1894–1978) was recommended by the Landsforbundet to the Porsgrund Porselaensfabrik (Porsgrund Porcelain Factory), where she served as artistic director between 1928 and 1945. More than any other Nordic ceramist in this period, Gulbrandsen studied the avant-garde design language of the Russian Constructivists and the Bauhaus. A coffee set she designed between 1929 and 1931 featured shaded areas in different colors that recall the massproduced German ceramics of the period, but she accented the pieces with strong red stripes and round red knobs on the vessel covers (Plate 34). Another coffee service, Model no. 1848, featured a pattern of alternating blue and cream diamonds with small brown patterns on the lighter surfaces. A related effort to introduce modern forms in glass was undertaken by Sverre Petterson (1994-1958), the first artistic director