design. Essays on modern Scandinavian design include Jennifer Hawking Opie, "Lovely Neoclassical Byways: Art Deco in Scandinavia," in Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton, and Ghislaine Woods, eds., Art Deco 1910–1939; and the late Frederick Wildhagen, "The Scandinavian Countries: Design for the Welfare Society," in History of Industrial Design 1919–199o: The Domain of Design.

Utopia  Reality: Modernity in Sweden, 1900–1960 is the catalog of an exhibition at the Bard Graduate Center in New York, which includes a number of important essays. Other useful essays are Gillian Naylor, "Swedish Grace ... or the Acceptable Face of Modernism?" in Paul Greenhalgh, ed., Modernism in Design; and Gunilla Frick, "Radical Change or Stagnation? Swedish Post-war Decorative Art," Scandinavian Journal of Design History 6 (1996) and "Furniture Art or a Machine to Sit On? Swedish Furniture Design and Radical Reforms," Scandinavian Journal of Design History I (1991).

Modern Danish design is covered in the exhibition catalog Dansk Design 1910–1945: Art deco funktionalisme, while Svend Erik Moller, ed., Danish Design is an older survey of the subject. More current scholarship is evident in a number of articles: Kevin Davies, "Twentieth Century Danish Furniture Design and the English Vernacular Tradition," Scandinavian Journal of Design History 7 (1997); Steen Ejlers, "Architects in Danish Graphic Design," Scandinavian Journal of Design History 7 (1997); Lise Osvald, "The Story of Kaj Dessau's BO, 1928–1941," Scandinavian Journal of Design History 3 (1993); Charlotte Paludan, "Marie Gudme Leth: A Pioneer in Danish Textile Design," Scandinavian Journal of Design History 5 (1995); and Claire Selkurt, "New Classicism: Design of the 192os in Denmark," The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 4 (Spring 1987).

Recent scholarship on Norwegian industrial design is exemplified by Kjetil Fallan's 2oo7 doctoral dissertation, Modern Transformed: The Domestication of Industrial Design Culture in Norway, ca. 1940-1970. It complements an earlier, more extensive, survey, by the late Frederik Wildhagen, Norge i Form: Kunsthåndverk og Design under Industrikulturen. Studies of Finnish design history are more numerous. Most recently, Pekka Korvenmaa has published a brief survey, Finnish Design: A Concise History. Marianne Aav and Nina Stritzler-Levine, eds., Finnish Modern Design: Utopian Ideals and Everyday Realities, 1930–1997 is the catalog of an exhibition at the Bard Graduate Center, while Ulf Hård af Segerstad, Modern Finnish Design is a much earlier survey. More specialized books, notably about Aino and Alvar Aalto and Artek are the exhibition catalog Artek 1935 – Artek 1985; and Thomas Kellein, Alvar  Aino Aalto. Design: Collection Bischofberger. Ilkka Huovio's doctoral dissertation, Invitation from the Future: Treatise of the Roots of the School of Arts and Crafts and its Development into a University Level School 1871–1973, is a detailed account of how Finland's most important design school developed. Päivi Hovi-Wasastjerna's Mainoskuva Suomessa: Kehitys ja Vaikutteet 189o-Luvulta 1030 – Luvun Alkuun, a history of Finnish advertising art, is based on her doctoral dissertation, the first completed at the University of Art and Design in Helsinki. Two articles that focus on the Aaltos and Artek are William C. Miller, "Furniture, Painting, and Applied Designs: Alvar Aalto's Search for Architectural Form," The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 6 (Fall 1987); and Renja Souminen-Kokkonen, "Designing a Room of One's Own: The Architect Aino Marsio-Aalto and Artek," Scandinavian Journal of Design History 7 (1997).

## Books

## General

Dal, Erik. Scandinavian Bookmaking in the Twentieth Century. Urbana, Chicago, and London: University of Illinois Press, 1968.

Fallon, Kjetil. Scandinavian Design: Alternative Histories. London and New York: Berg, 2012.

Fiell, Charlotte and Peter, Scandinavian Design. Cologne: Taschen, 2002.

McFadden, David, ed. Scandinavian Modern Design 1880–1980. New York: Abrams, 1982.