own versions of Constructivist sets. Liubov Popova's second collaboration with Meyerhold, The Earth in Turmoil, resulted in a set that functioned like a huge three-dimensional collage. Within a multi-tiered frame of red slats, authentic military items appeared—carts, rifles, machine guns, and even a real army truck was driven onto the stage. Behind the movement of actors and objects, illuminated slogans and captions flashed on a screen.

For Alexander Tairov's Kamerny Theater, the architect Alexander Vesnin (1883-1959) designed a cumbersome wooden structure for the stage version of G. K. Chesterton's English novel, The Man who Was Thursday. To simulate an urban scene, Vesnin added numerous props and multicolored lights to the structure which, unfortunately, took over the stage and left little room for the actors to move about. More experimental than any of these plays, however, was Vladimir Tatlin's 1923 staging of Zangezi, which was based on the writings of the Russian Futurist poet Velomir Khlebnikov. Tatlin's set consisted of an arrangement of large abstract wooden shapes, which he intended to parallel Khlebnikov's definition of words as building blocks of meaning.

The elaborate Constructivist sets that were characteristic of the avant-garde theater at the beginning of the NEP also served as a prelude to the exhibition designs that would become more prevalent at home and abroad, particularly during the First Five-Year Plan. The first major exhibition that significantly engaged the talents of artists and architects was the All-Union Agricultural Exhibition of 1923. For this event, the artist Alexandra Ekster (1882-1949) played a leading role. She collaborated on the external decoration of various pavilions including the design of one sponsored by the Soviet newspaper Izvestia, whose cacophonous structure resulted in its critique as a failure.

More successful was El Lissitzky's design for the All-Union Polygraphic Exhibition that was held in Moscow in 1927. Lissitzky was trained as an architect but worked extensively as a painter and publication designer. He had already created several noteworthy three-dimensional spaces in Europe, notably his 1923 Proun Room in Berlin, and he was able to effectively integrate lettering, printed texts, and three-dimensional structures. However, the Polygraphic Exhibition, which presented a survey of printing and publishing in the Soviet Union, provided only a modest opportunity for Lissitzky. The exhibit itself consisted primarily of printed pieces attached to flat panels. The entrance signage, which was comprised of large cut-out letters on a series of panels, was more dramatic, but the most impressive component of the design was the catalog that Lissitzky created together with Simon Telingater, a former Vkhutemas student. Rather than a single volume, it was a folder that contained a group of separate documents, all integrated with a common visual identity. Within several years, Lissitzky would be recognized as the Soviet Union's premier exhibition designer, after having undertaken the direction of three large state displays that were presented abroad.

## Transportation

While the Western countries were competing fiercely at the beginning of the century to develop automobiles and airplanes, the czarist government remained on the sidelines. The Putilov Factory was a major producer of railroad engines and military equipment but the czars had not fostered a culture of invention and continued to rely extensively on imported goods of all kinds. One exception to this policy was Igor Sikorsky (1889–1972), an engineer who built his first experimental helicopter with a twin-blade rotor in 19o9. After it and a second model failed, Sikorsky concentrated on fixed-wing aircraft and in 191 he constructed the S-5, which proved to be faster than foreign aircraft in the Russian service. This led to his appointment as Chief Engineer of the aircraft subsidiary of the Russian Baltic Railroad Car Factory, which approved Sikorsky's proposal for the first four-engine airplane. Named the S-21, it made its first flight in May 1913, following which Sikorsky designed a larger plane, the S-22, also known as the