ecstasy. Boccasile was also the principal poster propagandist for the Fascists during World War II, depicting the Fascist male as a muscular hero just as Mussolini wished him to be seen and often creating racist imagery that demeaned Jews and African-Americans, the latter recalling derogatory depictions of Africans while Italy was a colonial power. After the war, Boccasile returned to creating advertising posters that depicted the same buxom women whose seductive shapes were associated with a variety of products.

Boccasile and other poster artists who had many clients frequently worked in Milanese studios which were numerous. Boccasile originally worked in the studio of Alphonse Mauzan and then moved to the ACTA studio. The Officine Grafiche Ricordi, one of the oldest of these studios, was established early in the century and specialized in the design and lithographic printing of posters and sheet music. After World War I, Studio Maga was certainly one of the largest producers of advertising posters. Other studios included UPI; Agencia Gros-Monti, co-founded by the poster artist Mario Gros; Arti Grafiche Pirovano; and IMA (Idea Method Art). These studios specialized in the design and sometimes printing of advertising posters and other commercial art, but others were established with the aim of introducing the more scientific American style of advertising to Italy. Known as advertising agencies instead of graphic art studios because they produced entire campaigns rather than graphic design alone, they included the ACME-Dalmonte agency, the first and perhaps most important of these, founded in 1922 by Luigi Dalmonte Casoni (1881–1966), a former illustrator and graphic artist who had worked briefly for an advertising agency in New York; and Balza-Ricc, established in 1931 by Giulio Ricciardi (dates unconfirmed) and Pier Luigi Balzaretti (dates unconfirmed), former head of La Rinascente's advertising office in Milan. L'Ufficio Moderno (The Modern Office) was the principal publication where the theories and methods of the advertising agencies were discussed.

## Typography and book design

From the turn of the century until World War II, the major figure in the world of Italian book arts and typography was Raffaello Bertieri (1875-1945), a publisher with a background in printing. His principal forum was Il Risorgimento Grafico (The Graphic Renaissance), the printing journal he founded in 19o2 (see Chapter 17), while the publishing house in which he was a partner, Bertieri & Vansetti, set high standards for book printing.

Bertieri was a nationalist who argued for the establishment of an Italian printing office along with Italian foundries, typefaces, and schools of graphic art. These goals were not lost on the Fascists who adopted them as part of their program though subsequently paid minimal attention to them. Bertieri espoused the typefaces of the Italian Renaissance as models for modern fonts. In the pages of his journal, he wrote extensively about the printing arts, arguing strongly for the legibility of typefaces and for the appropriate use of varied faces in different kinds of publications. He also accommodated the journal to modern trends and changed its design accordingly over time.

In 1918, Bertieri became the director of the Scuola del Libro (School of the Book), which the Società Umanitaria had established in 1902 in Milan. The school's aim, which was similar to the society's aforementioned school for the applied arts that was founded a year later, was to foster a revival of the book arts, presumably following the Arts and Crafts movement and subsequent reforms in Germany. Bertieri headed the Scuola del Libro until 1925, during which time he made it more responsive to the technical needs of the graphic arts community. Among the prominent students in the 1920s were Attilio Rossi (1909–1994) and Carlo Dradi (1908–1982), both founders in 1933 of Campo Grafico, the magazine that promoted a modern graphic style in Italy.

Bertieri also had a close association with the Nebiolo foundry in Turin and collaborated with them on the production of various typefaces. The