charts, diagrams, and displays for the different pavilions and coordinated all the graphics for the guidebook, posters, and other publicity materials.

The monumentality of the exhibition and the grandeur of its design was a result that no one could foresee in the days of the First Republic, when many of the artists and designers who later worked actively for António Ferro's National Secretariat of Propaganda were showing their drawings and caricatures at the humor salons and publishing them in the flourishing satirical and literary press. What may have seduced them into collaborating with the Salazar regime was the deceptive freedom Ferro gave them to create a modern visual culture within the framework of a discretely repressive state.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

Although there is considerable literature about the art and politics of the various dictatorial regimes in the 192os and 193os, there is less about design, except for an abundance of books and articles on propaganda. Wendy Kaplan's catalog Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion, 1885-1945 contains a number of valuable essays about design in Italy and Germany, while Anthony Rhodes, Propaganda: The Art of Persuasion, WWII, edited by Victor Margolin, includes ample material about propaganda during dictatorships in the years before and during the war. The Rhodes volume is supplemented and amplified by Steven Heller, Iron Fists: Branding the 2oth Century Totalitarian State, which describes the propaganda apparatuses in Italy, Germany, and the Soviet Union during the dictatorial regimes and through World War II. The exhibition catalog Annitrenta: Arte e Cultura in Italia provides material on various cultural aspects of Italy under the Fascists as do Marla Susan Stone, The Patron State: Culture & Politics in Fascist Italy; Edward R. Tannenbaum, The Fascist Experience: Italian Society and Culture, 1922-1945; Doug Thompson, State Control in Fascist Italy: Culture and Conformity, 1925-43; and

Adam Arvidson, "Between Fascism and the American Dream, Social Science History 25, no. 2 (Summer 20o1). General literature on design, crafts, and exhibitions in Italy includes Emilio Ambasz, ed., Italy: The New Domestic Landscape: Achievements and Problems of Italian Design; Silvia Barisone, Matteo Fochessati, and Gianni Franzone, eds., The Wolfsonian Collection of Genoa; Irene de Guttry, Maria Paola Maino, and Mario Quesada, Le Arti Minori d'Autore in Italia dal 1900 al 193o; Simonetta Falasca-Zamponi, Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy; David Forgacs, Italian Culture in the Industrial Era, 1880-198o; Alfonso Grassi and Anty Pansera, L'Italia del Design: Trent’Anni di Dibattito; Vittorio Gregotti, Il Disegno del Prodotto Industriale: Italia, 1860–1980; Penny Sparke, Italian Design: 1870 to the Present, M. Michail and Cristina Tonelli, Il Design in Italia 1925/43; Anty Pansera, Storia del Disegno Industriale Italiano; Tony del Renzio, "Italy – The Italian Experience," in Barbie Campbell-Cole and Tim Benton, eds., Tubular Steel Furniture; Andrea Nulli and Giampiero Bosoni, Italy: The Parallel History of Design and Consumption," in History of Industrial Design, 1919–199o: The Dominion of Design; and Jeffrey T. Schnapp, "Epic Demonstrations: Fascist Modernity and the 1932 Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution," in Richard J. Golsan, ed., Fascism, Esthetics, and Culture. On specific topics of Italian design see the following on automobiles: Angelo Tito Anselmi, ed., Carrozzeria Italiana: Advancing the Art and Science of Automobile; and the monograph by Antoine Prunet, Pininfarina: Art and Industry 1930–2000. Books on Olivetti include the classic catalog Design Process Olivetti, 1908–1978 and Sibylle Kicherer, Olivetti: A Study of the Corporate Management of Design. Anty Pansera's Storia e Cronaca della Triennale is the definitive book on that subject, while her article "The Triennale of Milan: Past, Present, Future," Design Issues 2, no. I (Spring 1985) is a good introduction to the Triennale. The literature on Futurism is extensive. Perhaps the most comprehensive volume is the large exhibition catalog, edited by Pontus Hulten, Futurismo Futurismi but see also Balla, Depero: Ricostruzione Futurista dell'Universo; Enrico Crispolti, ed., Futurismo e Meridione; Fortunato Depero, My Own Futurism; Giovanni Lista, Le Livre Futuriste de la Libération du Mot au Poème Tactile; Claudia Salaris, Il Futurismo e la Publiccitá; and the short survey by Caroline Tisdall and Angelo Bozzolla, Futurism. Art Deco in Italy is covered in Fabio Benzi, Il Deco in Italia; Tim Benton, "Italian Architecture and Design," in Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton, and Ghislaine Wood, eds., Art Deco 1919–1939; and Rosanna Bossaglia, "L'Art Déco Italien," in L’Art Deco en Europe: Tendances Décoratives dans les Arts Appliqués vers 1925. Monographs on Italian product designers and architect-designers include Albrerto Bassi and Laura Castagno, Giuseppe Pagano; Franco Albini: Architecture and Design 1934-1977 with essays by Franca Helg, Stephen Leet, and Alberto Sartoris; Ugo La Pietra, ed., Gio Ponti; and Marco Romanelli, Gio Ponti: A World.

The literature on Italian graphic design during this period is equally extensive. Good overall studies are Giorgio Fioravanti, Leonardo Passarelli, and Silvia Sfligiotti, La Grafica in Italia; Giancarlo Iliprandi, Alberto Marangoni, Franco Origoni, and Anty Pansera, Visual Design: 5o Anni di Produzione in Italia; Karen Pincus, Bodily Regimes: Italian Advertising under Fascism; and Giuseppe Priarone, Grafica Pubblicitaria in Italia negli Anni Trenta, while more specialized books and articles include Sergio Coradeschi, "The Novecento Style in Italy: Commercial and Graphic Design," The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 3 (Winter 1987); Steven Heller and Louise Fili, Italian Art Deco: Graphic Design Between the Wars; Luigi Menegazzi, Il Manifesto Italiano and Settant'Anni di Manifesti Italiani della Raccolta delle Stampe A. Bertarelli; and Pepa Sparti, ed., L'Italia che Cambia Attaverso i Manifesti della Raccolta Salce. Books and articles on individual graphic designers and design offices include Germano Celant, Marcello Nizzoli; Enrica Torelli Landini, Attilio Calzavara: Works and Commissions of an Anti-Fascist Designer and the short article by the same author, "Attilio Calavera: Stories from an Archive," The Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 16 (Summer 1990); Dennis Doordan, "The Advertising Architecture of Fortunato Depero," Thr Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts 12 (Spring 1989); Leo Lecci, ed., Filippo Romoli: Manifesti d’Artista, 1928–1968; Lo Studio Boggeri, 1933-1981; Xanti Schawinsky: Malerei, Bühne, Graphikdesign, Fotografie; and Aldo Tanchis, Bruno Munari: Design as Art.

Writing on design in the Third Reich is scattered among a number of sources. There is abundant literature on Nazi propaganda and architecture but little on product design. A seminal article is John Heskett, Modernism and Archaism in the Third Reich," Block 3 (198o). Winifred Nerdinger, ed., Bauhaus-Moderne im Nationalsozialismus: Zwischen Anbiederung und Verfolgung also deals with design during this period, while Gert Selle, Design – Geschichte in Deutschland: Produktkultur als Entwurf und Erfahrung includes the interwar period in a broad overview of German design. Nazi graphic design is covered in Jeremy Aynsley, Graphic Design in Germany, 1890-1945, while other books touch on the relation of particular graphic designers and typographers to the broader design environment under the Nazis. These include Christopher Burke, Paul Renner: The Art of Typography; Leslie Cabarga, Progressive German Graphics 1900–1937; Gerald Cinamon, Rudolf Koch: Letterer, Type Designer, Teacher, and H. K. Frenzel, Ludwig Hohlwein and Christian Schneegass, ed., Ludwig Hohlwein: Plakate der Jahre 1906–1940. Graphic design that opposed the Nazis is discussed in James Fraser, ed., Malik-Verlag 1916–1947: Berlin, Prague, New York and Peter Pachnicke and Klaus Honef, eds., John Heartfield.

While much of the literature on Soviet design emphasizes the period before the Five-Year Plans, there are several publications that discuss the later period—Alexander Lavrentiev and Yuri V. Nasarov, Russian Design: Traditions and Experiment, 1920-1960 and Raymond Hutchings, Soviet Science, Technology Design: Interaction and Convergence are among them.