Chase also called attention to the lack of facilities to evaluate new products. In Your Money's Worth, he and his co-author cited the Bureau of Standards, a federal laboratory that was housed within the Department of Commerce over which Herbert Hoover presided for eight years, as a good example of a regulatory agency that could evaluate products and identify those that were poorly made. Chase was active in the nascent consumer movement of the early 193os that led to the founding of the Consumers Union, an independent product-testing and information organization, in 1936.

Chase's arguments for the economic use of resources and the reduction of waste were countered by spokesmen from the advertising industry, notably Roy Sheldon and Egmont Arens, who argued in their book Consumer Engineering (1932) that the real problem of the American economy was underconsumption. The function of the advertising agency, they stated, was to convince American consumers that new products ought to be replaced frequently even if they were still serviceable. For these advertising men, design was simply a technique to make products look attractive in order to increase their sales appeal.

The term “consumer engineering" was introduced by advertising executive Ernest Elmo Calkins (1868–1964) in an address to a convention of advertising professionals some time before 1932. Sheldon and Arens developed the concept in their book, calling "consumer engineering" the new business science. They justified the approach by claiming that resources were available in abundance and that consumers preferred a steady stream of new products. What was positive about their approach to design was their emphasis on improving the quality of products to make them more appealing, but in making that argument they paid no heed to the warnings of Chase and others that the prodigious waste of what they called “progressive obsolescence" would leave a debt for future generations to pay.

Like most advertisers, manufacturers, and designers in the interwar years, Sheldon and Arens identified women as the nation's primary consumers.

In 192o, women won the right to vote. This new opportunity was coupled with their growing presence in the workforce, primarily in secretarial jobs and other pink collar" occupations. However, large numbers of married women stayed at home and most advertising was targeted to them.

Electrification in American homes increased from 24 percent in 1917 to almost 90 percent by 1940. This created a huge market for electrical appliances of all kinds. The fastest-selling new products of the 192os were telephones, radios, and automobiles. The number of telephones jumped from about I million in 1900 to over 20 million in 193o. The rapid spread of radio, which surpassed automobiles in sales per capita, resulted in national broadcast networks that enabled people to share in the live transmission of cultural and news events, while making it possible for advertisers to address the listening public as a national market.

However, the growth in automobile sales far surpassed any other industry. From fewer than 5oo,ooo cars and other vehicles in 19oo, the number jumped to nearly 10 million in 192o, more than 26 million in 1930, and began to level off at 32 million in 1940. The sale of automobiles, led by the inexpensive models of Henry Ford but fueled as well by the styling of General Motors, transformed the American landscape and generated enormous industries of road building, gasoline distribution, and the construction of suburban homes.

## The Depression and the New Deal

The economic boom of the 192os was shattered by the Stock Market Crash of October 1929, which led to the Great Depression of the 193os. When Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected President in 1932, around 25 percent of the workforce was unemployed and family income had dropped almost 40 percent since the market crashed. During his first 1oo days in office, Roosevelt introduced a series of bills that stabilized the banking system, provided new regulatory powers for the government, and established the Tennessee Valley