Authority, a vast project to build dams and power plants in an impoverished region of the country. Congress also created the National Recovery Administration to help business leaders regulate prices, wages, and other matters, although the program ended when the Supreme Court invalidated it in 1935 because of administrative problems.

The aggregate of Roosevelt's proposals were known as the New Deal. One ofits aims was to stimulate the economy by creating thousands of jobs. Among the agencies the Roosevelt administration founded for this purpose were the Civilian Conservation Corps, which employed 2,5oo,ooo young men to improve huge areas of forestland by planting trees and by other means; and the Works Progress Administration, which employed more than 2,ooo,ooo workers annually, including many artists, writers, musicians, actors, and also designers, to paint murals, write plays, create posters, and generally improve thousands of schools, hospitals, airports, and other facilities. Besides the work programs, the federal government also established a new agency, the Social Security Administration, to ensure an income for retired workers. Between 1932 and 1937, President Roosevelt reduced employment to 9 percent, although the latter figure remained stable until American industry geared up with full force in 1942 to manufacture arms, uniforms, and equipment for World War II.

## Design Promotion

When Herbert Hoover became Secretary of Commerce in 192ı and began to develop programs and policies to advance American industry and its impact on the economy at home and abroad, he could not have imagined that before the end of the decade, product styling would be recognized as an important stimulus to the sale of everything manufactured in America from kitchen stoves to automobiles. With a background as a mining engineer, Hoover understood industry in terms of efficiency and devoted considerable energy to reducing the waste in the manufacturing system.

But when an invitation came to the United States government from the organizers of the Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs in Paris to design and build an American Pavilion for the exposition, Hoover did not immediately recognize the strategic value of participating. Instead, he sought the opinion of selected manufacturers and abided by their assessment that the United States had nothing of value to display. Given that advice, he was unable to recommend the construction of a pavilion although he did later send a delegation to Paris to assess the exhibits and prepare a lengthy report on their significance for American industry.

In a telephone address to the 4th Annual Exhibition of Women's Arts and Industries in 1925, Hoover revealed his belief that industrial art was women's work and that its primary purpose was to uphold the "canons of art and taste." His response suggests that as an engineer, he thought the hard design of fashioning an object and developing its mechanical function to be a man's job, while its decoration could be left to the refined sensibilities of a woman. Given such ideas, it was not unexpected that he did not recognize the value of the Paris exhibition for America's economy.

The delegation that Hoover sent to Paris included members of many trade associations as well as a number of delegates at large. One of the leaders was Charles R. Richards (1865–1936), who had prompted Hoover to organize the delegation. He was moved in part by the extensive survey of American applied arts that he undertook in 192o. Entitled Art in Industry, it covered a large number of manufacturing sectors from furniture and lighting design to printing, fashion, textiles, wallpaper and ceramics. It also included an extensive discussion of applied arts education in Europe and an account of schools of applied art in the United States. Though well documented, the survey unfortunately did not persuade the federal government—one of its funders—to invest in industrial arts education, thus leaving this important activity to the states or to private initiatives.