(1892-1956) Chichagova, two sisters who had studied at the Vkhutemas. The aim of the series was to get children to look at the world rationally. In contrast to most children's book illustrators, the sisters favored a Constructivist aesthetic that featured bold typography, flat silhouettes, and strong contrasting colors. These qualities are evident in their design for N. G. Smirnov's Otkuda posuda? (Where Do Dishes Come From?), which told the story of how ceramicware was made. Other subjects in the series included utensils, newspapers, and travel.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

General political and economic histories of Russia and the Soviet Union include Donald Treadgold and Herbert J. Ellison, Twentieth Century Russia; Peter Kenez, A History of the Soviet Union from the Beginning to the End; and Alec Nove, An Economic History of the USSR, 1917-1991. William Blackwell focuses on the development of industry in The Industrialization of Russia: An Historical Perspective, and related to it is Raymond Hutchings, Soviet Science, Technology, Design: Interaction and Convergence. The literature on the Russian avant-garde is extensive, going back to the 196os. I have used a selection of catalogs of comprehensive exhibitions as weli as numerous monographs on individual artists. General exhibition catalogs and monographs include Stephanie Barron and Maurice Tuchman, The Avant-Garde in Russia: New Perspectives; Magdalena Dabrowski, Leah Dickerman, and Peter Galassi, Aleksandr Rodchenko; Selim Khan-Magomedov, Rodchenko: The Complete Work and Alexander Vesnin and Russian Constructivism; Alexander Lavrentiev, Varvara Stepanova: The Complete Work; Sophie Lissitzky-Küppers, El Lissitzky: Life, Letters, Texts; John Milner, Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde; Margarita Tupitsyn, Rodchenko & Popova; Defining Constructivism; and Larissa Zhadova, Malevich: Suprematism and Revolution in Russian Art, 1910–1930. I discuss the work of Rodchenko and Lissitzky, including a chapter on their designs for USSR in Construction in my book The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy, 1917-1946. Christina Lodder's thorough Russian Constructivism is still the definitive book on this movement. Ruth Apter-Gabriel covers the work of avant-garde Jewish artists in Tradition and Revolution: The Jewish Renaissance in Russian Avant-Garde Art and the work of Jewish book artists is discussed in Futur Antérieur: L’Avant-Garde et Le Livre Yiddish. Gail Harrison Roman and Virginia Hagelstein Marquardt explore a range of topics related to the connections between Russian artists and art movements in the West in their edited volume Avant-Garde Frontier: Russia Meets the West, 1910–1930. Among the included essays is Christina Lodder's comparison of the Vkhutemas and the Bauhaus.

Peter Kenez, The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization, 1917-1929 provides valuable background material for understanding the social role of graphic design during this period. On graphic design in general, see Mikhail Anikst, Soviet Commercial Design of the Twenties; Szymon Bojko, New Graphic Design in Revolutionary Russia; Leah Dickerman, ed., Building the Collective: Soviet Graphic Design, 1917–1937: Selections from the Merrill C. Berman Collection, and Alla Rosenfeld, ed., Defining Russian Graphic Arts, 1898–1934: From Diaghilev to Stalin. On Russian and Soviet posters in general, see Klaus Waschik and Nina Baburina, Werbe für die Utopie: Russische Plakatkunst des 20. Jahrhundert. Steven White, The Bolshevik Poster focuses on the period around the Civil War, while Susan Pack, Film Posters of the Russian Avant-Garde and Christopher Mount, Stenberg Brothers: Constructing a Revolution in Soviet Design concentrate on film posters. Victoria E. Bonnell, Iconography of Power: Soviet Political Posters under Lenin and Stalin provides an analysis of poster iconography that deals specifically with gender and class.

Susan Compton, Russian Avant-Garde Books, 1917-1934 and Margit Rowell and Deborah Wye, The Russian Avant-Garde Book, 1910-1934 cover the