(1879–1973) in 1926 and 1927. The company's designs for silk dress fabrics were based on photographs that Steichen made of common objects such as matches and matchboxes, sugar lumps, mothballs, carpet tacks, and eyeglasses. He presented the objects in abstract patterns by photographing them from above, a technique that also produced heavy shadows, which became part of the pattern.

## The Origins of American Industrial Design

Following World War I, the United States experienced a severe recession in which 1oo,ooo businesses went bankrupt. Many companies had invested heavily to increase their production capacity and were faced with large inventories that they couldn't move. Besides the collapse of businesses, more than 450,00o farmers lost their land and 5 million people were unemployed. As the new decade progressed, however, the economy revived and the national manufacturing output expanded throughout the 192os. Despite growing wealth, income was unevenly distributed, with large numbers of people continuing to live below the poverty level. Consumption increased, though primarily among the middle and upper classes. This was due, in part, to advertising strategies intended to persuade the public that the problem facing the country was not overproduction but underconsumption.

Earnest Elmo Calkins (1868–1964), who co-founded the Calkins & Holden advertising agency in 19o2, was a leader in promoting the idea of underconsumption. The aim of advertising as he saw it was to persuade the public to spend more money. Calkins was among the first to recognize that design could contribute to this process by making products more attractive and appealing to the customer. He came to this conclusion through his initial belief that modern artists could help to accomplish this by producing more attractive ads.

In a textbook of 1905, Modern Advertising, Calkins stated that advertising should do more than simply announce and describe a product. It should also help to arouse a demand for it. He pursued this end by hiring skilled artists, illustrators, and engravers to create modern advertisements for his clients. He then concluded that improvements in package design and finally the design of products themselves were a natural extension of his initial realization that beauty was a quality that could help to sell more goods. In 1929, Calkins & Holden was, in fact, the first advertising agency to establish an Industrial Styling Division, which was headed by a former journalist and editor, Egmont Arens (1888–1966).

In an article of 1927, "Beauty the New Business Tool," which was published in the widely circulated Atlantic Monthly, Calkins described how "good taste passed from the advertisement to the package, and from the package to the product, keeping pace with the growing appreciation of taste on the part of the public due to increased culture and sophistication." Though increased sales based on "eye appeal" were the bottom line for Calkins, he advocated a conception of modern product form that countered the prevailing convention of adopting historic styles. "Beauty is original," he wrote. "It is found in the thing itself." He argued against turning a library into a Greek temple or a railway station into a Renaissance palace. In this sense, he continued a line of thought about appropriate design that began with John Ruskin and William Morris, although, unlike them, he believed firmly that a good design should represent "the aesthetic spirit of the age." Guided by Calkins & Holden and other advertising agencies, manufacturers began to understand the value of design and they looked to the advertising agencies to provide them with experts, a practice that continued throughout the 193os.

Joseph Sinel (1889-1975), an illustrator who emigrated to the United States from New Zealand in 1918, may have been the first to characterize his services as "industrial design," by which he meant drawings of industrial objects used in advertisements. However, Sinel did go on to design products for various