Others like George Switzer (dates unconfirmed) and Egmont Arens were specialists in packaging. John Vassos (1898-1985) moved between illustration, packaging, and the design of products and interiors. He is probably best known for the books such as Contempo and Ultimo: An Imaginative Narration of Life Under the Earth that he wrote and illustrated in a Deco style, but in 1932 he designed a turnstile for the Perey Company of New York that was first used at the Brooklyn Museum and then at the 1933 Century of Progress exhibition in Chicago. It became a standard for the turnstile industry, while also lowering Perey's manufacturing costs and significantly increasing sales.

## Industrial Design outside New York

Fueled in part by the publicity that New York designers like Bel Geddes and Dreyfuss were attracting for their products, the practice of industrial design began to spread, particularly in the Midwest. In Chicago, the two large mail-order suppliers, Sears Roebuck and Montgomery Ward, had become conscious of design by the early 193os. At Sears, the ability to produce merchandise of good quality at a low price became a problem after World War I. Managers continued to discover poor-quality goods in various departments and the company instituted a process of quality control. This was difficult to maintain as most of Sears' products came from outside suppliers, although the company did begin to do more in-house design.

As Sears began to diversify its distribution from mail order to retail outlets, it developed protocols for space planning in its stores that included directional signs, interior display equipment, and fixtures such as lighting. In 1932, Sears created its own Store Planning and Display Department, which was headed for years by a company employee, Les Janes (dates unconfirmed). Sears also created a design department, more than likely prompted by the success of rival Montgomery Ward's Bureau of Design, which was established in 1931. In 1934, Sears hired Jack Morgan (1903–1986) as its chief product designer. Morgan had come from General Motors where he conceived the first automobile bumper that was integrated into a total car design. At Sears he mainly designed appliances but was also responsible for a pair of streamlined roller skates.

The long-time director of Montgomery Ward's Bureau of Design was Ann Swainson (19o0–1955), the first female executive at the company. Swainson, who was born in Sweden, studied fine and applied arts at Columbia University and was the director of design at the Chase Brass and Copper Company in Connecticut before Montgomery Ward hired her away. In Chicago she assembled a sizeable staff of architects and designers of products and packaging. Initially they were charged with evaluating the quality and appearance of the myriad items that Montgomery Ward purchased from thousands of outside suppliers, but they began to redesign the company's own products as well.

Swainson's first big challenge at Montgomery Ward was the redesign of the company's mail order catalog, a project that took five years to complete. A major change was the replacement of the antiquated stock woodcuts—initially with metal plates but eventually with modern photographs that included live models. With the introduction of the new catalog, profits increased exponentially.

By 1935, the Bureau of Design had a staff of 18 designers who worked on products, and 14 more who did packaging. The Bureau staff redesigned everything from radios and furniture to refrigerators, clothing, and tableware. Much of Swainson's job was supervising the work of her staff, a task not dissimilar to a consultant designer like Walter Dorwin Teague, who devoted his main energy to soliciting new business while his staff designers produced the initial sketches and prototypes for his clients. Among the designers who worked for Swainson and then went on to establish their own industrial design offices or head those of other companies were Dave Chapman (1909-1978), who was the first Head of Product Design at Montgomery Ward before he left to start his own practice; Richard Latham (1920-1991), who left Ward to join Raymond

Loewy's Chicago office after World War II; Joseph Palma (1909–2007), who became the Bureau's Head Designer after Dave Chapman departed in 1934; and Ellen Manderfield (1916–1999), a former Supervisor of Styling at the Colonial Radio Company (later known as Sylvania), who designed hundreds of products for Montgomery Ward between 1947 and 1951.

Prior to Montgomery Ward's inauguration of its Bureau of Design, other large companies established their own in-house design departments. Beginning in 1927, George Sakier (1897-1988) began designing bathroom fixtures for the American Radiator and Standard Sanitary Corporation, where he became director of the company's own Bureau of Design. Trained as both an artist and an engineer, Sakier not only created modern bathroom fixtures but by 1933 he also designed complete prefabricated bathroom units of which thousands were sold.

In the early 192os, General Electric established a committee on “product styling" and in 1928 Ray Patten (1897-1948) joined the company to supervise the design of domestic appliances. Initially the work of his staff was called "Appearance Design," a name that was not changed to"Industrial Design" until 1948. Among the innovative products to come from the General Electric design group in the 193os was the Unit Kitchen," which the company began to market in 1937. Though such cooking laboratories had their precedents in Georg Muche's Haus am Horn at the Bauhaus exhibition of 1923 and most noticeably in Grete Schütte-Lihotsky's Frankfurt kitchen of 1926, the GE kitchen upgraded those precedents with a host of new appliances including, besides the refrigerator, a garbage disposal unit and a dishwasher. All were produced as modules so they could be arranged in a variety of spaces.

Donald Dohner (1897-1943), who had previously been a consultant to the Westinghouse Electric Company in Pittsburgh while teaching at the Carnegie Institute of Technology, became director of design in the Westinghouse engineering department around

193o. Unlike Ann Swainson at Montgomery Ward, Dohner was directly engaged with the company's engineering staff and helped to develop a number of engineering solutions for electrical appliances. This was in sharp contrast to the way engineers at many other companies dismissed the industrial designers as "style and color boys."

Among the designers who established their own offices outside New York in the early 193os were Harold Van Doren (1895-1957) and John Gordon Rideout (1898-1951), who opened an office in Toledo, Ohio, in 1933. Possibly the first consultant design office in the Midwest, Van Doren and Rideout attracted a large number of local and regional clients including the Toledo Scale Company, which had earlier rejected Norman Bel Geddes' bold proposals for product and factory designs. For another Toledo firm, the American National Company, they designed a series of children's scooters, wagons, and tricycles with streamlined forms, which went on the market in the early 193os at about the time streamlining was first applied to various forms of transportation.

According to Sheldon and Martha Cheney, Harold Van Doren was the first designer to experiment with colored plastic materials as exemplified in Van Doren and Rideout's Air-King Midget Radio of 1933. Made of a synthetic called Plaskon with additional metal and glass parts, the radio possessed a Deco skyscraper form, which demonstrated the possibility of molding plastic into myriad fluid shapes. Van Doren and Rideout had previously adopted the skyscraper icon for several scales they designed for the Toledo Scale Company in 1931. The same icon applied to a radio was a radical departure from the wooden cathedral shape of competitors such as Atwater Kent, Crosley, Philco, RCA, and General Electric. The single-piece housing of the Air-King reduced manufacturing costs and its pea green color helped to boost sales by more than 3oo percent.

In Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Brooks Stevens (1911–1995) opened an industrial design office in 1933,