would not become central to the design community for years to come.

## Women and People of Color as Designers

The chauvinism evident in the way Stevens and other male designers gendered the female consumer worked in two ways for women who aspired to enter the industrial design profession. In some instances it led manufacturers to believe that women designers would have a better sense than men of what their customers wanted and in fact this attitude did result in a few women such as Ann Swainson, Ellen Manderfield, and Irene Pasinski (1923-2002), a graduate of the Carnegie Institute of Technology's industrial design program, developing successful careers in the field. While also successful, Belle Kogan (ī902–2ooo), who opened her own New York office in 1932, described the difficulties she faced as a female designer from some antagonistic manufacturers and skeptical engineers who did not believe a woman had the mechanical ability to design a successful product. Few women had Kogan's determination and many went instead into related fields such as interior, textile, or fabric design, where a woman's sensibility was considered an advantage. Kogan hired other women to work in her studio and is thought to be the first to hire an African-American designer.

If there were few women industrial designers during the interwar years, there were almost no people of color. This had nothing to do with design ability but rather with access to a world of social relations on which design practice depended. Blacks, for example, had long worked in the decorative and mechanical arts (see Chapter 13) but, with rare exceptions, did not have access to manufacturing and sales facilities that would have enabled their work to reach a wide audience. Writing in the February 194o issue of Opportunity, the monthly magazine of the National Urban League, Vernon Winslow (d.o.b. unconfirmed-1993) praised the black artists who had created the "Negro Renaissance," but noted that "where the messages of the white artist were recaptured by white industry, ours fell upon an impoverished helpless group without industrial ownership or participation." What was lacking, according to Winslow, was the means of industrial translation." In the white world, he wrote, painters could contribute to commercial photography or advertising design while sculptors could assist in designing automobiles or myriad products such as electric irons, radios, or telephones. By contrast, Negro artists were confined to painting, and sculptors to making allegorical figures. Winslow saw a potential breakthrough in the Community Art Centers that had been founded as part of Franklin D. Roosevelt's Works Project Administration (WPA). In these centers, as well as in WPA workshops for the production of posters and furniture, blacks and whites could work side by side, a phenomenon that was not realized at the time in the commercial worlds of industrial and graphic design.

Blacks were, however, active during the 192os and 193os as independent inventors because there were no social barriers to obstruct their initiatives. They could obtain patents by submitting the appropriate drawings and consequently sell their patents or find means to market their products themselves. The same was true for women, who had an extensive history of inventing, beginning in the early years of the American republic.

Among African-Americans, Garrett Morgan (1877-1963), an all-around inventor, initially became wealthy as the publisher of an African-American newspaper. One of his first patented inventions was a gas mask that prevented a rescuer from breathing smoke or noxious fumes when entering a room filled with either. He also invented a traffic signal, which was a pole unit in a 'T-shape that featured three positions, Stop, Go, and a third position that halted traffic in all directions so that pedestrians could safely cross the street. This was a variation on the familiar traffic light, which was first introduced in Detroit by William Potts in 192o. What Morgan added was the possibility of controlling the light from a distance with a mechanical