link. He eventually sold his invention to General Electric for \$40,ooo, thus participating in a familiar practice whereby large companies purchased patents from independent inventors for modest sums and then profited from them many times over.

Women of all ethnic backgrounds were also active as inventors. African-American inventors in the 192os included Mary Jane Reynolds (dates unconfirmed), who patented a gear mechanism for hoisting and loading heavy articles. In 1928, Marjorie Stuart Joyner (1896– 1994) received a patent for a permanent wave machine, consisting of a set of thin rods hooked to a hair dryer hood. Joyner ceded the patent rights to the Madame C. J. Walker Manufacturing Company, which used the device extensively in its chain of hair salons, thus ensuring sizeable revenue for the inventor.

One difference between white and black women inventors is that white women had access to positions in major corporations that women of color did not. Beulah Louise Henry (1887-1973), a white woman who lived in New York, was often referred to as the "Lady Edison." Though she was hired by a number of companies in the 19ços and 196os to develop products for them, she did so after having patented many inventions herself and having run several of her own companies. Henry has been credited with as many as 11o inventions during her lifetime. The first in 1912 was a vacuum ice cream freezer, while the second and third were a handbag and a parasol with detachable cloth covers in different colors. Henry founded the Henry Umbrella and Parasol Company to sell her parasols, and established a second company, B. L. Henry Company, to market other inventions, which included a spring-limbed doll, sponges that held soap in the middle, and the machine that made the sponges. In 193o she patented a device she called a “protograph," that produced an original typed document and four copies without carbon paper.

At General Electric, Maude Adams (1872–1953) developed an incandescent bulb that was used widely in color film projectors and made other improvements to projector lamps for showing color films. Edith Clarke (1883–1959), also working at General Electric, secured a patent in 1925 for a calculator that monitored and predicted the performance of electrical transmission lines and for other devices as well. Women produced additional inventions during this period in fields as diverse as home maintenance, agriculture, and medicine. It was thus not for lack of talent that women and people of color were not more active as industrial designers but rather lack of opportunity arising from different kinds of prejudice.

## The Growth of the Design Profession

Despite restrictions on who could become a designer, the industrial design profession grew dramatically from the late 192os to World War II, when many designers were enlisted in the war effort. In one case after another, design had been shown to not only improve the appearance of products and frequently their function as well but also to enable them to be manufactured more efficiently and less expensively and above all to increase sales, often by considerable amounts.

Bel Geddes’ Horizons was perhaps the first publication that sought to explain to the public what a designer did. Following Earnest Elmo Calkins, who characterized industrial design as an act of styling or making products visually attractive, Bel Geddes described the industrial designer as an artist who could create beauty in the commercial world. "Just as surely as the artists of the fourteenth century are remembered by their cathedrals," he wrote, "so will those of the twentieth be remembered for their factories and the products of those factories."

Eight years later, when Harold Van Doren published Industrial Design: A Practical Guide, the profession had already moved through a romantic phase and was becoming more integrated into the manufacturing process. Van Doren, who had been an assistant museum director and an art editor before becoming a designer, was no stranger to the fine arts but he was careful to adopt a business-like tone by