interior design incorporated the comfortable seating and separate compartments that Frances Waite Geddes had pioneered in the China Clipper.

Besides its role in persuading Douglas Aircraft to build the $\scriptstyle \mathrm { { D C - 3 } } ,$ American Airlines pioneered in several areas that were not directly related to aircraft design but were central to the development of a flight system that included traffic control, ticketing, and airports. With its fleet of ${ \mathrm { D C } } - 3 s ,$ American embarked on an ambitious service program that led to its Admiral's Club lounges for frequent flyers—the first being established at newly opened La Guardia airport in 1939. It also introduced a centralized process for making reservations, as well as the nation's first air traffic control system.

In 1926, the passage of the Air Commerce Act created a national air transportation network that delegated the construction of airports to local authorities while retaining for the federal government the designation of navigation aids and air routes, as was the case with its control of the nation's waterways. Two models were adopted for the first terminal designs: the depot hangar, which combined a waiting room and offices with an aircraft hangar; and the "simple terminal," which was modeled after a railroad station. These terminals changed significantly both in scale and design as air transport expanded rapidly during the 1930s.

## Other modes of transport

Changes in the design of automobiles, trains, and airplanes were far greater than those in other modes of transport. Around 1933, the recently formed Greyhound Corporation hired Raymond Loewy to modernize the look of its bus fleet. By 1936, the company had fielded its Super Coach, which drew some inspiration from the Burlington Zephyr. The conventional engine hood had been dropped and the front was flat. Loewy contributed a visual scheme to enhance the streamlined look. He modernized the Greyhound logo and devised a blue and white color combination, while creating a sense of speed with a two-dimensional depiction of streamlined fenders. Later versions of the Super Coach replaced Loewy's faux fenders with ribbed metal sides like the Burlington Zephyr.

The Indian Motorcycle Manufacturing Company also drew on streamlined forms for its Indian Chief models in the 192os and 193os, while Schwinn introduced its streamlined bicycle, the Aerocycle, in 1934. The Aerocycle had flared fenders and a teardropshaped tank that contained a built-in headlight like the Chrysler Airflow. It was the first bicycle to have balloon tires, which were wide pneumatic tires that could be fully inflated with relatively low pressure. Even more so than the Indian Chief motorcycle, the streamlined styling of the Aerocycle was primarily for show and was intended mainly to boost bicycle sales. It did not last, as the streamlined elements made the bicycle heavier and more difficult to pedal.

The White Motor Company, which began to produce large semi-trucks and trailers in the 192os, adopted streamlining in the 193os for several of its models. Around 1937, the company hired Count Alexis de Sakhnoffsky (1901-1964), an experienced custom car designer, to create concept drawings for streamlined trucks. Several of these led to production vehicles that de Sakhnoffsky designed. One was a truck cab that had a curved front with a shaped grille that resembled those on the more advanced automobiles, and another was a tractor-trailer rig designed for the Canadian brewery, Labatt's, whose cab had a curved grille and pulled a van with a rounded front that fitted snugly against the sloping back of the cab. Metal stripes on the sides of the cab and the van suggested speed, just as they did on numerous trains and automobiles.

Unlike many European countries, transoceanic passenger transport was not a major industry in the United States during the 192os and the 193os. Hence, there were no American equivalents to the grand European ocean liners of the period such as the Normandie in France, the Bremen in Germany, or the Queen Elizabeth in Britain. One could argue that the same revolution in taste that occurred in the design of European ship interiors was