instead evident in the United States in the design and redesign of railroad coach interiors. Nonetheless, there is at least one example of ocean liner design, Raymond Loewy's interiors for three Panama Line shipsthe Panama, the Cristobal, and the Ancon. 'The Panama Line sailed between New York, Port-au-Prince, Haiti, and the Canal Zone, where the Panama Canal was located. In 1904 the Panama Railroad Company, which also operated a steamship service between New York and the canal, passed from French to U.S. government hands with the transfer of the canal's ownership. To mark the 2sth anniversary of the canal's opening, the Panama Line, which belonged to the railroad, inaugurated the three new ships, which were designed by naval engineer George Sharp (dates unconfirmed). Working closely with him, Raymond Loewy's office did the interiors. Loewy started the project in 1936 and the ships were launched in 1938–1939.

To counteract the historical styles that were also being rejected by designers in other countries, Loewy introduced modern furnishings similar to those one might have found in a contemporary New York restaurant or bar. Walls were painted in soft pastel shades to make the passengers feel comfortable, while the dining rooms, bars, and staterooms featured built-in furniture with drawers that opened and closed easily Stainless steel, aluminum, Formica, and other industrial materials were used extensively for the furnishings Clearly, Loewy's parallel project to design a new train for the Pennsylvania Railroad would have had some relevance to his design for the three ships, given that all were means of transport intended to provide an experience of luxury and comfort for their well-to-do passengers.

## Design Education Design schools

Although preceded by programs in the decorative arts at various art schools, the first program in the United States to train industrial designers was initiated in 1934 at the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh.

The principal faculty member was Donald Dohner (1897–1943), who had been working as a designer for the Westinghouse Electric Company. Dohner, joined by Alexander Kostellow (19oo–1954), a professor of painting, taught an introductory course that showed students how to integrate qualities of art and utility in the design of industrial products. Students also learned about materials, model making, and industrial processes, and were introduced to manufacturing through factory visits. In 1935, Dohner went to Pratt Institute, a New York art school, to start a comparable program, and a year later he hired Kostellow and his wife Rowena Reed (19oo-1988), who had taught sculpture at Carnegie, to join the faculty. The Kostellows and Dohner subsequently developed the industrial design program at Pratt, which drew on the Carnegie model, and after Dohner's death in 1944, Alexander Kostellow and Rowena Reed continued to teach in the program for a number of years. Perhaps impressed by the professional program at Pratt, New York University brought in Donald Deskey to help create a department of industrial design in 1940.

From 1927 to 1943, Frederick Keisler (1890— 196s), who had collaborated briefly with Adolf Loos and was a former member of the De Stijl group, directed the Laboratory for Design Correlation within the Department of Architecture at Columbia University. The program was more commercially oriented than Keisler's avant-garde background might have suggested. Keisler had come to New York in 1926 following extensive activity in European avantgarde circles. In New York he applied himself to commercial projects such as store window design and published a book on the subject, Contemporary Art Applied to the Store and Its Display, in 193o. He was also a founding member of AUDAC the same year. Keisler's theoretical interests centered on how humans use space, and he explored these in his design for the Film Guild Cinema in 1929, his biomorphic furniture of the early 194os, and his “Endless House" project of 1958–1959.

On the West Coast, Walter Baermann (1903- 1972), who had attained degrees in architecture and engineering in Germany as well as a doctorate from the University of Munich and who came to the United States in 1929 at the invitation of Joseph Urban, helped to found a privately-funded Graduate School of Design in Pasadena in 1937 and subsequently became its director. During the first year, students were engaged in design projects and workshops that involved industrial materials and processes, while also following lectures and seminars on economics, sociology, and technology. In the second year, problems were on a larger scale and students were required to complete an independent thesis. With the school's inclusion of social science courses, Baermann brought a more rigorous intellectual approach to design training than was typical in other curricula. Perhaps because of the curricular rigor, the school became part of the California Institute of Technology in 1941.

The programs at Carnegie, Pratt, and other schools that followed their lead were pragmatic and professional. They trained students for industry as it was and did not seek to instill in them the motivation to change either the design profession or the conditions in which designers worked. Other programs, however, conceived design education more idealistically, linking it on the one hand to the craft communities of the past in England and Scandinavia, and on the other hand to the European avant-garde movements, particularly as they were evident in the Weimar and Dessau Bauhaus.

The Cranbrook Academy, which opened in 1932 in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, had its roots in the Arts and Crafts movement and the ideals of Scandinavian National Romanticism. Cranbrook's first director, the Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen (1873-195o), who came to the United States to teach architecture at the University of Michigan in 1923, had long wanted to establish a school for architectural training that would also incorporate the related arts of painting, sculpture, and the handicrafts. Saarinen found a partner in George

Booth, a Detroit newspaper publisher and devotee of the Arts and Crafts, who provided both the land and the funding for Cranbrook.

As Saarinen enunciated Cranbrook's purpose, it was not to be a school in the traditional sense but rather a working community, where experienced teachers would guide the students. Like Walter Gropius, who designed the Dessau Bauhaus building and then filled it with furniture and lighting from the Bauhaus workshops, Saarinen also designed a number of buildings for the Cranbrook Educational Community, which included, besides the Cranbrook Academy of Art, the Kingswood School for Girls and the Cranbrook School for Boys along with the Cranbrook Museum and Library. For the director's residence, Saarinen created custom furniture that rivaled the exquisite craftsmanship and restrained elegance of furnishings from the workshops of Vienna and Paris. As heads of the Cranbrook workshops, Saarinen brought some of the teachers from Scandinavia. His wife Loja (1879–1968) was a weaver who established her own studio. Besides heading the Weaving Workshop, she also designed and wove rugs and tapestries with patterns inspired by Scandinavian folk motifs for many of the Cranbrook buildings including the director's residence. Marianne Strengell (r909–1998), another Finnish weaver, came to Cranbrook from Helsinki in 1937 as a weaving instructor. During her years at the school, Strengell designed many commercially successful fabrics that were adopted by such clients as Knoll Furniture, United Airlines, Russel Wright, and General Motors. Another Finnish craftsperson, Maija Grotell (1899– 1973), taught ceramics, while the Swedish sculptor Carl Milles (1875–1955) headed the sculpture workshop and undertook numerous commissions for single figures and monumental groups for the Cranbrook campus as well as other locales. In 1941, Saarinen invited Walter Baermann from Pasadena to head the recently created Department of Industrial Design. Asked to prepare a report on the present and future of Cranbrook, Baermann noted that the school's greatest success derived from the relationship between its accomplished faculty and their apprentice students. He found the atmosphere to be "romanticized," and recommended the introduction of a rigorous curriculum for undergraduates and graduates as well as a junior college program. There was considerable resistance to his suggestions and after only a brief tenure at Cranbrook, Baermann left for a job in Washington, DC, in the Office of Civil Defense. Likewise, conversations with car designer Gordon Buehrig about founding a Department of Automobile Design, given Cranbrook's proximity to the auto manufacturers in Detroit, also came to naught.

Those who studied at Cranbrook and some of those who taught there in the 193os included the Saarinens’ son Eero (1910-1961), and their daughter Pipsan Swanson (1905-1979), Charles Eames (1907– 1978) and Ray Kaiser Eames (1912-1988), Harry Weese (1915–1998), Benjamin Baldwin (1913–1993), and Harry Bertoia (1915–1978). While still a student, Bertoia supervised the silver and metal workshop whose projects were as good as those done anywhere. Eames, who with Eero Saarinen won first prize in MoMA's Organic Design in Home Furnishings competition, also taught industrial design at Cranbrook. Pipsan Swanson, who trained students in furniture design, and her husband Robert Swanson (19oo-1981) introduced a line of functional and flexible furniture, known as Flexible Home Arrangement or F. H. A., in 1939. Florence Schust Knoll (b. 1917), became a leading furniture and interior space planner after World War II. She was a student at the Kingswood School for Girls and the Cranbrook Academy of Art before she went on to study architecture with Mies van der Rohe at the Illinois Institute of Technology.

Whereas many of the émigré modernist designers in New York came from Germany, Austria, or Hungary and drew ideas from the modern craft movements in those countries, the Cranbrook community was built on a strong commitment to the Arts and Crafts tradition as filtered through a modern Scandinavian sensibility. Although the school's contacts with American industry were minimal before the war, the cohort of students who studied there in the 193os later introduced a major new approach to American design. Imbued with a craft sensibility and a respect for technology, they engaged experimentally with materials and produced major breakthroughs, especially in the design of furniture. The strength of the Cranbrook approach was initially evident in the impressive amount of work by Cranbrook students, former students, and faculty that was accepted for the Museum of Modern Art's exhibition, Organic Design in Home Furnishings, in 1941. This included the prize-winning furniture of Charles Eames and Eero Saarinen as well as that of Harry Weese and Benjamin Baldwin along with fabrics by Marianne Strengell.

The first-prize winner in the textile division of the Organic Design exhibition was Marli Ehrmann (1904-1982), who had studied textile design at the Bauhaus and at the time headed a program in textile design at the School of Design in Chicago. The school's director was former Bauhaus teacher László Moholy-Nagy. He had come to Chicago in 1937 at the invitation of a civic group, the Association of Arts and Industries, to head up a design school that was originally called the New Bauhaus. During the decade that Moholy was director of the school, it went through several changes, beginning as the New Bauhaus in 1937, then reinventing itself as the School of Design in 1942, and finally becoming the Institute of Design in 1944.

Although some Americans taught at the school, a number of the teachers were European. Marli Ehrmann and Hin Bredendieck were former Bauhaus students; Gyorgy Kepes had worked with Moholy in Berlin and London; Alexander Archipenko (1887-1964) was a Russian sculptor who had been associated with the Cubist movement in Paris; and Marianne Willisch (d.o.b. unconfirmed-1984) was an artist who managed the Austrian Werkbund's shop in Vienna. In 193o, she moved to Chicago, where she joined a group of artists and architects to organize the Chicago Workshops, a cooperative that produced furniture and crafts and sold them in their own shop. George Fred Keck, one of the American teachers at the school, was an architect with an active Chicago practice. He designed several innovative houses for the Century of Progress Exhibition in 1933 including the House of Tomorrow and the Crystal House. Keck headed the architecture department for about five years.

Moholy was a painter and sculptor as well as a photographer, industrial designer, and a graphic artist. Unlike Eliel Saarinen at Cranbrook, he did not emphasize traditional craft techniques in the curriculum. As a former avant-garde activist, he was more interested in experimental work and sought to break down the barriers between the different art and design practices. Though Moholy received most of his financial support from local businesses, particularly the Container Corporation of America, the school did not train students for conventional design jobs in industry. Moholy was an idealist who believed that industry should be guided by more innovative visions and consequently the emphasis of the school was on encouraging students to think about their work in new ways. Due to private funding, financial support was always a problem and the school was never on a secure footing until it was absorbed by the Illinois Institute of Technology in 1949.

Central to the curriculum was the Foundation Course. It was based to some degree on the one at the Bauhaus, which Moholy taught after he replaced Johannes Itten in 1923. In the 193os, no other design school in America had such a course, whose intent was to open the students' minds to the possibilities of working with different materials. Moholy also believed that artists and designers needed a strong humanistic education so he invited the philosopher Charles Morris and two other professors from the University of Chicago to give courses at the school, which they did for a brief period.

Similar to the Bauhaus in Germany, students completed the Foundation Course and then entered one of the specialized areas. These included photography, product design, textiles, interiors, and architecture as well as a special Light Workshop, headed by Gyorgy Kepes, that incorporated photography, film, typography, and layout. Kepes based his curriculum on the manipulation of abstract elements—light, space, line, and color—and techniques like photomontage. He described his pedagogy in The Language of Vision, an influential book that was published in 1944 by the émigré publisher Paul Theobald in Chicago.

Unlike Cranbrook, whose students and faculty made a major impact on the design of American furniture and interiors after World War II, the influence of Moholy's curriculum was particularly strong in photography whose practice in America his students and faculty helped to transform. In graphic design, Kepes introduced a pedagogical approach that was unknown anywhere else in the United States and after the war a number of the school's students achieved prominence in this field. Many of Moholy's students became design teachers themselves and continued to transmit to their own students the spirit of experimentation and wonder that he introduced in the Chicago curriculum.

Another former Bauhaus teacher, Josef Albers (1888-1976) also kept the Bauhaus spirit alive at Black Mountain College, an experimental school that combined the visual, literary, dramatic, and musical arts. Albers and his wife Anni (1899–1994), who had studied weaving at the Bauhaus under Gunta Stözl, came to the United States in 1933, the year Black Mountain was founded. Albers, who was primarily a painter and print maker, taught a design course where students learned to see their environment in a new way. Around 1940, the school introduced some courses in architecture and furniture design, although Black Mountain never had a formal program in either of these areas. Anni Albers directed a workshop for weaving and textile design that prepared students to design for industrial production. The textiles that Albers and her students produced at Black Mountain had a distinctive quality. The patterns were geometric and they featured the thread as a material, while the range of colors was limited primarily to black, white, and natural fibers.

Though Frank Lloyd Wright opposed the pedagogy of the Bauhaus because it did not originate in America, he was not against the apprenticeship system, which Walter Gropius had originally built into the pedagogical design of the Weimar Bauhaus and which Eliel Saarinen introduced at Cranbrook, where Wright lectured occasionally. In a series of six lectures he gave at Princeton University in 193o, Wright called for a new relationship between design and industrial production. To achieve this, he proposed the establishment of corporate-funded decentralized “industrial style centers” in rural areas around the country. According to Wright's idea, master craftsmen at each center would guide small numbers of students in the study of glassmaking, pottery, textiles, sheet metal, landscaping, and the arts. Having lauded the use of the machine in his seminal Hull House lecture of 19oı, Wright imagined that students at his centers would learn with the latest techniques and be trained on the most modern machines. The other aspect of Wright's proposal was that the students would spend several hours a day working the land and would possibly bring some revenue to the centers by marketing the products they designed. Although Wright found no sponsorship for his idea, he did open his own apprenticeship academy two years later. Known as the Taliesin Fellowship because of its proximity to Taliesin, Wright's home and studio in Wisconsin, its focus, however, was on architecture rather than design, and instead of creating their own designs, students were devoted primarily to supporting Wright's practice.

Two years before the New Bauhaus opened its doors in 1937, the Bauhaus in Germany became the model for another American school, the Design Laboratory, which operated in New York City between 1935 and 1940. Initially the Works Project Administration's Federal Art Project, which was established as part of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal, funded it and free tuition was offered to students. The school's director, Gilbert Rohde, already a well-known industrial designer, envisioned the Design Laboratory as a training ground for professional designers. Its mission, he said, was to coordinate training in aesthetics, product design, machine fabrication, and merchandising. When it opened, it included a design school with courses in industrial design, textiles, and ceramics, a graphic arts school, and a school of fine arts. Several of the faculty members, Hilda Reiss and Leila Ulrich (dates unconfirmed), had studied at the Bauhaus for several years in Dessau and Berlin under Mies van der Rohe, and a third teacher, William Priestley (dates unconfirmed), had been at the school briefly before it closed. During the severe WPA budget cuts in June 1937, the Design Laboratory lost all government support, leading members of the faculty and student body to continue it as a private enterprise, which they did until 1940.

The Federal Arts Project also funded Community Arts Centers, which were intended to bring arts and crafts training and exhibitions to rural areas or urban neighborhoods that had little access to art schools, galleries, or museums. A number of centers were established in African-American neighborhoods and of these the Harlem Community Art Center was the most prominent. Between 1937 and 1942, the Harlem Center offered classes in art, craft, and design to large numbers of black students. Until 1938, the center's director was the sculptress Augusta Savage (1892–1962), who was also a prominent arts educator. Then Gwen Bennett (1902–1981), a poet, artist and illustrator, took over the job. Although the faculty of men and women was integrated, African-American women played a prominent role as teachers. They included Louise E. Jefferson (1908-2002), a commercial artist who taught textile design; Octavia Clark (dates unconfirmed), whose specialty was costume design; and Sarah West (dates unconfirmed), who taught metal craft. In Chicago, the South Side Community Arts Center, which opened in 194o, also served as a place where