Metro types primarily for advertising, he preferred text faces, and his subsequent designs such as Electra (1935) and Caledonia (1938) were both refined romans that were well suited for book printing.

In Chicago, Robert Hunter Middleton (1898– 1985) joined the Ludlow Typograph Company as a type designer around 1924. Middleton had been a student in the Department of Printing Arts which was established in 1921 at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. There his teacher and mentor was Ernst Frederick Detterer (1888-1947), who was inspired by William Morris and Edward Johnston. Detterer introduced Middleton to the world of letterpress printing, and during his years at Ludlow, Middleton's commercial work was informed by his deep knowledge of printing history as well as his openness to new tendencies.

Ludlow was a relatively new company when Middleton started there. Its focus was on display advertising and newspaper headlines for which it had to build up a diverse array of typefaces. Like others who made a living designing type for commercial purposes, Middleton created typefaces for Ludlow that covered the spectrum from historic to modern styles. It was inevitable that the company would want its own competitor with Futura, and this resulted in Tempo (1930), which Middleton designed in varying weights. More original were his Delphian Open Title (1928), a delicate yet full-bodied face with white lines cut into the letters, and Stellar (1929), a more expressive san serif counterpart to its European competitors. During his long career with Ludlow, Middleton designed almost 100 typefaces, which ranked him in sheer volume with Frederic Goudy and Morris Fuller Benton. Within the company, a strong supporter of modern typefaces was Douglas McMurtrie, the company's publicist and author of many books on typography including the previously mentioned Modern Typography and Layout.

## Graphic Design

The term “graphic design" is generally attributed to W. A. Dwiggins, who first used it in a short newspaper article of 1922, “New Kind of Printing Calls for New Design." There he claimed that traditional methods of design were inadequate to assure the high visual quality of printed material produced by new mechanical techniques such as halftone engraving, machine composition, and photogravure. Dwiggins identified three domains of design: the vast amount of workaday printing which, he stated, did not need designers; the domain of printing as a fine art, which was already populated with "printer-artists," by whom he surely meant designers of books and typography like Daniel Berkeley Updike and Bruce Rogers; and lastly the domain of printed matter made for advertising ads, brochures, letterheads, booklets, and the like. This domain, Dwiggins argued, was badly in need of good design.

In 1928, Dwiggins sought to improve the situation with his book Layout in Advertising, which was published the same year as Jan Tschichold's Die Neue Typographie (The New Typography). Taking on the full range of designed materials from newspaper and magazine advertising to trademarks, letterheads, and packaging, Dwiggins advocated a broad modern approach but did not espouse a specific program as Tschichold did.

At the time Dwiggins published his book, there were relatively few freelance graphic designers in the United States. Most were layout men, who designed print advertising and the occasional trademark or letterhead. In New York, Lucian Bernhard established a practice as an advertising and typeface designer, drawing on his experience in Germany, where he created posters, alphabets, trademarks, and other print materials (see Chapter 17). Dwiggins himself was active in advertising and book design to which he added typography in 1929.

In Chicago, the development of an independent graphic design profession was abetted by the Society of Typographic Arts, which was established in 1927. Despite its title, the organization's founders wanted to represent the interests of "the designer and illustrator as well as those of the type designer and typographer." Around 1934, graphic design in the city received an additional impetus from the establishment of 27 Chicago Designers, a group that was formed to promote the work of its members through an annual book intended for wide distribution in Chicago and elsewhere. Among the designers who were featured in the early volumes were John Averill (dates unconfirmed), Rodney Chirpe (dates unconfirmed), Egbert Jacobson (1890–1966), Robert Hunter Middleton, Ray DaBoll (1892–1982), Bert Ray (dates unconfirmed), Oswald Cooper, and Sid Dickens (dates unconfirmed).

These men had a wide variety of talents and did not provide a unified profile of what practitioners in the graphic arts did. Averill made woodcut illustrations for advertising layouts, DaBoll was a calligrapher, Ray designed publications and advertising flyers, Chirpe created package and product designs, Dickens specialized in industrial styling, packaging, and layouts, Cooper did layouts and type design, Middleton designed type, and Jacobson was the design director of the Container Corporation of America. As tenuous as their professional relationships might have seemed, these were nonetheless sufficient to bring the designers together to solicit new business. As a result, the group made a strong impression with their annual promotional book, which helped to build a national reputation for Chicago graphic art. Chicago talent was also showcased in the Society of Typopgraphic Arts' annual Chicago Printing Exhibition, which helped to promote a distinct graphic identity for the city.

Despite this attention to Chicago graphic design, Charles Dawson (1889–1940), a black artist who established a design studio on Chicago's South Side around 1924, was not included. Dawson's clients were the black businesses that had not previously considered using a designer and he worked for a number of them including Annie Malone's PORO Beauty Schools for which Dawson designed a series of ads that depicted black beauties throughout history, Madagasco hair products, and several enterprises of the Overton Hygienic Company, which was owned by entrepreneur Anthony Overton. At the time Dawson began to work as a commercial artist, there were scarcely any black designers, a condition that remained until many years later.

In New York, the American Institute of Graphic Arts (see Chapter 17) played a similar role to the STA. As in Chicago, the AIGA embraced a cross-section of graphic arts professionals from book designers and art directors to publishers and printing executives. The organization held the first of its annual Fifty Books of the Year exhibitions in 1922 and additionally showcased the national Printing for Commerce exhibitions, beginning around 1936. At the Fifty Books of the Year show in 194o, T. M. Cleland delivered an address, "Harsh Words," in which he castigated the tenets of modernism, whether evident in architecture, furniture, or typography. Although there were graphic designers in the AIGA and elsewhere who agreed with Cleland, many others were open to the new ideas that had originated in Europe and were making their way to the United States.

Modern graphic design was fostered in New York by the Composing Room, a typesetting shop that Sol Cantor (1892–1965) and Dr. Robert Leslie (1885–1987) set up. The Composing Room sponsored the A-D Gallery, which exhibited the work of émigré and young American graphic designers, and PM (Production Manager), a printing magazine edited by Percy Seitlin (dates unconfirmed). PM was one of the few magazines along with Advertising Arts that showcased new American talent as well as the work of designers who were moving to the United States from Europe. Both PM and the A-D Gallery were strong promoters of European modernism and helped to introduce it to the New York design community by exhibiting the work of émigré designers such as George Salter and Herbert Bayer and publishing it as well. In 1940, Leslie dropped the name of PM for his journal and reintroduced it as A/D (Art Direction).

In Brooklyn, Leon Friend, chairman of the Art Department at Abraham Lincoln High School, introduced his students to modern graphic design through a special curriculum that was supplemented by a design club called the Art Squad, whose members completed practical projects for school events and publications. A number of Friend's students went on to become prominent designers, initially including Alex Steinweiss and Gene Federico and later Seymour Chwast and Sheila Levrant de Bretteville. Both Steinweiss and Federico, who began their careers in the late 193os, belonged to a small group of young American designers who were strongly influenced by modern design in Europe.

Some designers, like Lester Beall (1903-1969) and Paul Rand (1914-1996), first learned about new European tendencies through books and magazines. Beall worked as a freelance illustrator and graphic designer in Chicago before moving to New York in 1935. In Chicago, he showed his interest in the European avant-garde through a series of advertisements for the Chicago Tribune in which he brought together photography, collage, and asymmetric layouts. In New York, he began to use photography and photomontage extensively and he combined these with bold arrangements of type, although he did not use san serif types exclusively. Among his New York projects, his covers and spreads for the magazine Photoengraving stand out for their high degree of experimentation, which he continued in his cover designs for Abbott Laboratories' house organ What's New, where he pioneered the use of modern design in pharmaceutical advertising.

Paul Rand started as a freelance designer in New York around 1934. For a time, he worked in the office of industrial designer George Switzer, creating packaging and advertising, and this led to an opportunity in 1936 to design layouts for Apparel Arts, a men's fashion magazine. On the basis of his initial work for this publication, Esquire-Coronet, which owned Apparel Arts, offered him a full-time position. Rand distinguished himself for inventive editorial spreads and covers and was soon promoted to art director of Esquire-Coronet's

New York office, where he designed fashion spreads for Esquire as well. Besides his work for Apparel Arts and Esquire, Rand did a series of covers for Direction, a left-oriented cultural magazine, beginning in 1938 and continuing until 1945. Similar to Beall's covers for Photoengraving, Direction offered Rand a chance to explore new ideas without commercial constraints. He was less formally experimental than Beall, but he displayed a witty approach to design that resulted in unusual juxtapositions of drawn and collaged images. Neither he nor Beall copied the Europeans. Instead, they adopted techniques that were new to them and added their own sensibilities, which were more eclectic than the Europeans'. Rand had a strong sense of metaphor and played with the multiple meanings of an image. This was evident in the 1940 Christmas cover for Direction, where he made reference to the German occupation of Czechoslovakia and Poland by featuring crossed strips of barbed wire that functioned as ribbonlike wrapping for a gift package as well as an enclosure for war prisoners. In 1941, Rand became the art director of a newly formed advertising agency, William H. Weintraub & Co., where he worked on campaigns for Disney Hats, Coronet Brandy, Dubonnet, and El Producto Cigars, among others. His ads were filled with visual wit and added a humorous sensibility to American advertising that would be further exploited by others in the post-war years.

During the 192os and 193os, a number of graphic designers who worked in a modern style arrived in the United States from Europe. Some sought new work opportunities, while others came because of the deepening political crisis. Most settled in New York. The contributions of some like Lucian Bernhard, Mehemed Fehmy Agha, Alexey Brodovitch, Joseph Binder, A. M. Cassandre, Gyorgy Kepes, and George Salter have been discussed already. Others included Herbert Matter and Erik Nitsche from Switzerland; Will Burtin (1909–1972), Hans Barschel (1912–1998), and Herbert Bayer from Germany (see Chapters 21 and 27); the Hungarian Albert Kner (1899–1976);