Xanti Schawinsky from Milan (see Chapter 27); the Czech Ladislav Sutnar, who had been his country's leading modernist designer before he came to New York to install the Czech government's pavilion for the 1939 World's Fair and was stranded after the German invasion of Czechoslovakia (see Chapter 25); and the Frenchman Jean Carlu a prominent poster designer who, like Sutnar, had come to New York to organize an exhibition at the 1939 World's Fair for the French Information Service and chose to remain after the Germans occupied France (see Chapter 22). All stayed in the United States after World War II except for Carlu, who returned to France in 1953. Through their work, teaching, and in some cases exhibitions, these European modernists gained recognition, and even before World War II they began to have a significant impact on American graphic design. Kepes' teaching in Chicago was discussed earlier. In New York, Will Burtin began to teach at Pratt in 1939, and Bayer conducted a successful design course at the American Advertising Guild in New York. The influence of the Europeans was to be felt more strongly after World War II when they and a number of their students attained prominence as art directors, teachers, or freelance designers.

## U.S. Government Programs

In addition to funding the Design Laboratory in New York and the Community Art Centers, the Federal Art Project (FAP) supported artists through its Poster Division, which produced about 35,ooo poster designs between 1935 and 1943. The main studio was in New York, but by 1938, others had been set up in 18 states. Richard Floethe (19o1–1988), a German printmaker and illustrator who had studied at the Weimar Bauhaus, headed the New York studio, which produced more posters than any other.

European modernism was a strong model for many FAP designers, far more than it was for designers who worked for commercial clients. Among the poster artists whose influence could be seen in the FAP posters were E. McKnight Kauffer, A. M. Cassandre, and Joseph Binder. The Poster Division broke the race barrier by employing a number of African-American artists, as did the Federal Art Project in general. Many women also designed posters for the division.

Posters announced cultural events, promoted health and safety, and encouraged tourism. Most were produced by the silk-screen method, which allowed for multiple colors while costing considerably less than lithography. Among the many artists besides Richard Floethe who worked in the program were Vera Bock (19o5-d.o.d. unconfirmed), Anthony Velonis (1911-1997), Cleo Sara (dates unconfirmed), Jerome Roth (dates unconfirmed), and Katherine Milhous (1894-1977). Though many of the FAP poster designers were artists and returned to painting or printmaking when they left the WPA, others continued their careers as illustrators or graphic designers.

The government also hired professional designers for special projects. In 1933, Charles Coiner, the art director for N. W. Ayer in Philadelphia, was commissioned to design a symbol for the National Recovery Administration (NRA). It was intended for a sticker or window card that businesses could display to show their support for the NRA. Coiner chose a blue American eagle with a gear wheel in one claw to signify industry and three lightning bolts in the other to represent energy and determination. In 1937 the Rural Electrification Administration (REA), that did not yet have electricity, commissioned Lester Beall to design a set of posters to promote the REA in rural areas. Beall created several simple images to illustrate the benefits of electricity—a light bulb, a water faucet, a washing machine, and radio among them (Plate 48). He designed two additional series with photographic images, mainly of rural dwellers, to suggest satisfaction with the program and to indicate its positive benefits. The government also made use of "pictorial statistics,' the technique for representing social data that was invented in Vienna by Otto Neurath (see Chapter 25) and promoted in the United States by a student