# Chapter 21: Weimar Germany 1918-1933

## Introduction

At the time of Germany's defeat in World War I, Kaiser Wilhelm II fled to Holland, thus ending two generations of imperial rule that had begun when Germany became a nation in 1871. The power breach was quickly flled by the Social Democratic Party, which, on November 9, 1918, declared Germany a republic. The Social Democrats first attempted to employ the regular army to quell an uprising in Berlin by the far left-wing Spartacus League and to quash a nascent Soviet-style republic in Bavaria, but they soon had to resort to the use of vigilantes known as the Freikorps to repress the revolutionaries. With order more or less secured, the Social Democrats conducted elections for a National Assembly to write a new constitution. Hoping for a large turnout, they commissioned posters from some of the leading Expressionist artists such as Cesar Klein (1879–1940), Heinz Fuchs (1886–1961), and Max Pechstein (1881–1955). The overall intent of the poster campaign was to unite the disparate groups of Germans in support of the Assembly's work. However, response to the posters was uneven and the workers were particularly critical. Either they found the Expressionists' drawings lacking in realism or else they thought the portrayal of the working class was too bleak. One poster that may have had a more positive effect was Max Pechstein's Do not strangle the newborn freedom through disorder and killing your brothers. Your children could go hungry. 'Though the poster stressed dire consequences for supporting the Socialists, it presented a child clutching a flag as a hopeful symbol for the new republic.

Even though some posters failed, the electorate still supported the Social Democrats, making them the largest party in the National Assembly, For safety's sake, the Assembly decided to convene in Weimar, a small town, where the great German literary figures Goethe and Schiller once lived. There, the delegates wrote the new constitution, which was the most liberal in Europe, giving women the right to vote.

Despite the Socialist victory, however, the Weimar Republic was replete with extremist groups on both the left and right. During the 14 years of its existence, the republic was rife with the tension of conflicting values, which were as readily manifest in the realms of art, architecture, design, literature, and music as they were in partisan politics. The left was most prominently represented by the Communist Party, founded in 1919, while the extreme right rallied around the National Socialist German Workers' Party whose leader was Adolf Hitler. More moderate factions on the right yearned for a return to the imperial regime of Kaiser Wilhelm II, during which Germany had enjoyed economic prosperity and international respect.

Until 1923, Germany faced severe shortages of food and fuel, harsh demands for reparations by the victors in World War I, and runaway inflation which, at its worst, could multiply the price of a loaf of bread 40 or 5o times within the span of a few hours. The stabilization of the currency in 1924, the easing of Germany's debt payment schedule (Dawes Plan), and large short-term loans from investors in the United States helped the economy considerably and by 1927 German production had regained its impressive 1913 level. The American stock market crash in 1929 and its ensuing affect on Germany, however, resulted in the recall of loans and reintroduced a period of economic and then political chaos. The National Socialist or Nazi Party rose to power on this misery, desperation, and anger. Hitler, a dedicated opponent of democracy, became the last chancellor of the republic on January 30, 1933.