of Neurath's, Rudolph Modley (dates unconfirmed), author of several books on the subject.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

There is a considerable body of literature on the 192os and 193os in the United States. For general background I relied on Alan Brinkley, The Unfinished Nation: A Concise History of the American People; William E. Leuchtenberg, The Perils of Prosperity, 1914-1932, 2nd ed.; Alice G. Marquis, Hopes and Ashes: The Birth of Modern Times, 1929–1939; Cabell Phillips, From the Crash to the Blitz; Emily S. Rosenberg, Spreading the American Dream: American Economic and Cultural Expansion, 1890-1945; and William H. Young with Nancy K. Young, The 193os. American Business Abroad: Ford on Six Continents by Mira Wilkins and Frank Ernest Hill chronicles the international operations of the Ford Motor Company.

Books and articles that emphasize technology and invention include William E. Akin, Technocracy and the American Dream: The Technocrat Movement, 1900-194I; Ruth Schwartz Cowan, A Social History of American Technology; Brian Horrigan's essay, "The Home of Tomorrow, 1927-1945," in Joseph Corn, ed, Imagining Tomorrow: History, Technology, and the American Future; Thomas Hughes, American Genesis: A Century of Invention and Technological Enthusiasm, 1870–1970; David F. Noble, America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism; Phil Patton, Made in USA: The Secret Histories of the Things that Made America; and Ronald C. Tobey, Technology as Freedom: The New Deal and the Electrical Modernization of the American Home. Several books and studies focus on particular cities. James Sloan Allen writes extensively about the Container Corporation of America in The Romance of Commerce and Culture: Capitalism, Modernism, and the Chicago-Aspen Crusade for Cultural Reform, and John Zukowsky included Chicago design in a major exhibition, the second of two, on Chicago architecture and design at the Art Institute of Chicago.

The catalog, edited by Zukowsky, is Chicago Architecture and Design, 1923-1993: Reconfiguration of an American Metropolis. Lloyd Engelbrecht's PhD dissertation The Association of Arts and Industries: Background and Origins of the Bauhaus Movement in Chicago discusses the formation of the association and its role in establishing the New Bauhaus in Chicago. The Toledo Museum of Art also mounted an exhibition of local design and published a catalog entitled The Alliance of Art and Industry: Toledo Designs for a Modern America.

Books that focus on the decorative arts are Richard Guy Wilson, Dianne H. Pilgrim, and Dickran Tashjian, The Machine Age in America, 1918–1941, the catalog of an exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum; Karen Davies, At Home in Manhattan: Modern Decorative Arts, 1925 to the Depression; Alastair Duncan, American Art Deco; Charlotte and Peter Fiell, eds., 3os/4os Decorative Art: A Source Book; Paul T. Frankl, New Dimensions: The Decorative Arts of Today in Words & Pictures; Martin Greif, Depression Modern: The Thirties Style in America; J. Stewart Johnson, American Modern, 1925–1940: Design for a New Age; R. L. Leonard and C. A. Glasgold, Modern American Design by the American Union of Decorative Artists and Craftsmen; Rudolph Rosenthal and Helena L. Ratzka, The Story of Modern Applied Art, Kristina Wilson, Livable Modernism: Interior Decorating and Design during the Great Depression; Frederick P. Keppel and R. L. Duffus, The Arts in American Life; and Marta Sironen, A History of American Furniture. Charles R. Richards' report of 1929, Art in Industry, is essential reading.

Monographs on designers include David Gebhard and Harriette Von Breton, Kem Weber: The Moderne in Southern California, 1920–1941; David Hanks, The Decorative Designs of Frank Lloyd Wright, Jonathan Lipman, Frank Lloyd Wright and the Johnson Wax Buildings; Robert McCarter, Frank Lloyd Wright, Christopher Long, Paul T. Frankl and Modern American Design; and Eva Zeisel: Designer for Industry, the catalog of an exhibition at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs de Montréal with an essay by Martin Eidelberg.

There is an equally extensive body of literature on American industrial design during this period, including books on invention. The most thorough survey of the subject remains Jeffrey Meikle's Twentieth Century Limited: Industrial Design in America, 1925–1939. A specific aspect of American industrial design was the subject of a book by Meikle's doctoral student, Christine Cogdell, Eugenic Design: Streamlining America in the 1930s, while Meikle's book followed Donald Bush's The Streamlined Decade, adding considerably more archival research. Meikle also published The City of Tomorrow; Model 1937 as one of the pamphlets in a series released by Pentagram and also American Plastic: A Cultural History, which looked at plastic from a cultural rather than a technological perspective. Other surveys of industrial design or streamlining during the interwar years include Sheldon and Martha Cheney, Art and the Machine: An Account of Industrial Design in 2oth-Century America; Martin Eidelberg, ed., Design 1935–1965: What Modern Was. Selections from the Liliane and David M. Stewart Collection, the catalog of an exhibition at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs de Montréal; Claude Lichtenstein and Franz Engler, Streamlined, a Metaphor for Progress: The Aesthetics of Minimized Drag, David A. Hanks and Anne Hoy, American Streamlined Design: The World of Tomorrow; John Perrault, Streamline Design: How the Future Was, the catalog of a small exhibition at the Queens Museum in New York, while more general books are Arthur Pulos’ American Design Ethic: A History of Industrial Design to 1940, the first in a two-volume survey of American design history by a pioneer researcher in the field; Jeffrey Meikle's short volume, Design in the USA; and Gregory Votolato's American Design in the Twentieth Century. Pulos also wrote an essay on the subject “United States: The Wizards of Standardized Aesthetics" for the more comprehensive volume History of Industrial Design 1919–1990: The Domain of Design. Terry Smith includes some material on industrial design in Making the Modern: Industry, Art, and Design in America. On the design of automobiles, see Stephen Bayley, Harley Earl and David Gartman's sociological study, Auto Opium: A Social History of American Automobile Design; on trains, the reader can consult Bob Johnston and Joe Welsh with Mike Schafer, The Art of the Streamliner and on airplanes see Carroll Glines and Wendell F. Moseley. The DC-3: The Story of a Fabulous Airplane. Several books that focus on particular companies and make reference to their involvement with design are Ralph Caplan, The Designs of Herman Miller Pioneered by Eames, Girard, Nelson, Propst, Rohde; Boris Emmet and John E. Jeuck, Catalogues and Counters: A History of Sears, Roebuck and Company; Roland Marchand, Creating the Corporate Soul: The Rise of Public Relations and Corporate Imagery in American Big Business; and Alfred P. Sloan Jr., My Years with General Motors.

Design and issues related to it at the Century of Progress and the 1939 New York' World's Fair are discussed in Robert W. Rydell's general study, World of Fairs: The Century-of-Progress Expositions and in more specific books and articles: Barbara Cohen, Steven Heller, and Seymour Chwast, Trylon and Perisphere: The 1939 New York World's Fair, Official Guide Book, New York World's Fair 1939, and two articles on African-American participation in the Century of Progress, August Meier and Elliott M. Ridwich, "Negro Protest at the Chicago World's Fair, 1933–1934," Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society 59 (1966) and Christopher Robert Reed, "A Reinterpretation of Black Strategies for Change at the Chicago World's Fair, 1933-1934,’ Illinois Historical Journal 81 (Spring 1988).

There are numerous monographs on American industrial designers who rose to prominence during this period and a few on companies that promoted good design. These include Glen Adamson, Industrial Strength Design: How Brooks Stevens Shaped Your World; The Designs of Raymond Loewy; Russel Flinchum, Henry Dreyfuss. Industrial Designer: The Man in the Brown Suit, David A. Hanks with Jennifer Toher, Donald Deskey: Decorative Designs and Interiors; Paul Jodard, Raymond Loewy; Angela Schönberger, Raymond Loewy: Pioneer of American Industrial Design;

William Lescaze: The Rise of Modern Design in America; the IAUS catalog, William Lescaze; Martin Pawley, Buckminster Fuller; and John McHale, R. Buckminster Fuller.

Classic texts by industrial designers are Norman Bel Geddes, Horizons; Roy Sheldon and Egmont Arens, Consumer Engineering: A New Technique for Prosperity; and Harold Van Doren, Industrial Design: A Practical Guide. Raymond Loewy published several books including The Locomotive, a large picture book called Industrial Design, and his memoir, Never Leave Well Enough Alone. Walter Dorwin Teague's memoir, Design This Day: The Technique of Order in the Machine Age, like Loewy's, has useful material about the author's design activities in the 193os. Some of Buckminster Fuller's writings from this period can be found in his collection, Nine Chains to the Moon. Hugh Ferris's The Metropolis of Tomorrow is an album of his futuristic architectural drawings. The critical writing of Stuart Chase during this period provides a helpful counterargument to the generally optimistic writing about industrial design. See his books Men and Machines, The Tragedy of Waste, a book written with F. J. Schlink, and Your Money's Worth: A Study in the Waste of the Consumer's Dollar. Richard Vangermeersch, The Life and Writings of Stuart Chase (1888–1985) provides analyses of Chase's work. On invention, Patricia Carter Sluby, The Inventive Spirit of African Americans: Patented Ingenuity describes numerous inventions by African-Americans, while Autumn Stanley chronicles those by women in Mothers and Daughters of Invention: Notes for a Revised History of Technology.

The role of the Museum of Modern Art in promoting modern design in America as well as background on its department of architecture and design is chronicled in Russell Lynes, Good Old Modern: An Intimate Portrait of The Museum of Modern Art. See also Eliot Noyes, Organic Design in Home Furnishings, the catalog of the exhibition by the same name. Among design programs and schools during these years, the New Bauhaus, which became the School of Design and then the Institute of Design, is the most widely covered. See 5o Jahre New Bauhaus: Bauhausnachfolge in Chicago; Achim Borchardt-Hume, Albers and Moholy: From the Bauhaus to the New World; Margret Kentgens-Craig, The Bauhaus in America: First Contacts, 1919-1936; and Moholy-Nagy: A New Vision for Chicago, the catalog of an exhibition at the Illinois State Museum. Moholy's major writings from this period are published in English as The New Vision and Abstract of an Artist. Mary Emma Harris, The Arts at Black Mountain College tells the story of that institution where Josef Albers, another Bauhaus faculty member, taught, while thus far Design in America: The Cranbrook Vision, 1925-1950 is the definitive work on the Michigan school. Jim Lesko's article "Industrial Design at Carnegie Institute of Technology, 1934-1967," Journal of Design History 10, no. 3 (1997) describes the beginning of the industrial design program at that institution, while Paul Makovsky's MA thesis, The Forgotten Bauhaus: The Design Laboratory, New York City, 1935–1940, provides important information on the short-lived school where Gilbert Rohde taught.

Some general surveys of graphic design that include material on this period are R. Roger Remington with Lisa Bodenstedt, American Modernism: Graphic Design 1920 to 1960; R. Roger Remington and Barbara Hodik, Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design; Philip Meggs, A History of Graphic Design, 3rd ed.; and Leon Friend and Joseph Hefter, Graphic Design: A Library of Old and New Masters in the Graphic Arts. A more specialized publication is Christopher de Noon, Posters of the WPA, 1935–1943.

The history of American advertising is generally not included in histories of graphic design yet the literature as advertising relates to design is extensive. Some books include Michele H. Bogart, Artists, Advertising, and the Borders of Art, Stephen Fox, The Mirror Makers: A History of American Advertising & Its Creators; Otis Pease, The Responsibilities of American Advertising: Private Control and Public Influence, 1920–1940; and Jackson Lears, Fables of Abundance: A Cultural History