that were sometimes playful and covers that were always visually striking.

Hollywood had the strongest influence on the Latin American cinema, which developed primarily as an art form for the masses rather than the elite. Latin American film industries had their own directors, actors, and technicians, but they faced heavy competition from American film companies, which frequently made movies in Spanish for Latin American audiences.

Despite the strong influences from Europe and the United States, Latin American artists and intellectuals were deeply concerned with issues of cultural independence and national identity. Consequently, they looked abroad for the latest developments but adapted them to their own conditions and concerns. Advances were made as well through the many accomplished immigrants who contributed to the development of the decorative and commercial arts in most Latin American countries.

## Cuba

Cuba was the last colony in Latin America to gain independence from Spain. The Treaty of Paris that Spain and the United States signed in December 1898 recognized Cuba's liberty, but the United States continued to occupy the country until 1902, departing only when the Cubans agreed to append the Platt Amendment to their Constitution. This amendment, which remained in place until 1934, gave the United States the right to intervene militarily in Cuba whenever it perceived the property and rights of American citizens to be endangered.

By the time of independence, the United States was heavily involved in the Cuban economy. It had, in fact, tried to purchase Cuba from Spain several times during the 19th century. Despite Spain's refusal to sell the colony, by 1902 the United States nonetheless controlled a sizeable percentage of mineral exports and owned most of Cuba's sugar and cigarette factories.

As a colonial power, Spain had little interest in fostering industrial innovation in Cuba, preferring instead the traditional agricultural and mining enterprises. The Spaniards could count on the cheap labor of thousands of Africans who had been brought to Cuba in the 18th and 19th centuries to work on the sugar and tobacco plantations as slaves and were only emancipated in 1886.

Cuba was particularly attractive as a market to American companies because they could operate there without political resistance or trade barriers. Those living in Cuba had access to the latest American furniture styles, home appliances, and new mechanical devices. Literally hundreds of American companies opened sales offices in Cuba and sold everything from sawmill equipment and modern bathroom and toilet fixtures to gas kitchen ranges and soda fountain machinery. The American Talking Picture Company distributed a complete line of phonographs and gramophones, while another company was the dealer for Victor Talking Machines, and an office supply store had the exclusive right to sell Underwood Typewriters. American products were also on sale at El Encanto, Cuba's leading department store, which two Cuban partners founded in 1888. In Havana, its competitors were Floglar; Fin de Siglo, whose art director was Enrique Garcia Cabrera (1893-1949); and Woolworths, but in many other Cuban cities where El Encanto established subsidiaries it had a more exclusive market.

American automobiles were popular in Cuba as early as 19oo and many of the early manufacturers had dealerships there. As in the United States, it was the lower price of the Ford, known in Cuba as el fotingo (the jalopy), that made automobile ownership possible for many Cubans. By the end of the 193os, Ford had dealerships across the island

Tourism began slowly around 1915, but by the mid-192os it had begun to rival sugar and tobacco as a major source of national income. Gambling and sensuality were major attractions and tour operators worked hard to create an image of Cuba as a tropical paradise. It was referred to, in fact, by many as the "Paris of the Caribbean." The tourist experience was