## The Werkbund, Arbeitsrat für Kunst, and the Novembergruppe

Germany's defeat in World War I was a setback to the promotion of its commercial goods abroad. Not only had World War I caused damage to prominent German industries, but also the nation's products were less welcome in foreign markets. During its Cologne exhibition in 1914, the Werkbund had initiated an intense debate about the future of industrial production that set Herman Muthesius's espousal of standardized product types against Henry van de Velde's claim that the individual artist was still the best person to develop new ideas for industrial goods. The debate was interrupted by the war, which, if anything, strengthened the mechanization of German industry, thus posing a challenge to those who supported Handwerk or craft.

When the Werkbund reconvened after the war, its members remained divided in their attitudes towards the crafts. At the organization's meeting in September 1919, Hans Poelzig (1869-1936), one of Germany's leading architects, urged in a keynote speech that a line be drawn between the world of industry and the world of art and craft. Poelzig equated industry with soulless profit-seeking materialism, while art and craft, he said, were based on the value of work for its own sake. Only artists and craftsmen, he argued, could create objects of lasting value. Though Poelzig's talk garnered some enthusiasts, many Werkbund members remained skeptical of his moral distinction between industrial production and craft. Among those who disagreed with him, Robert Bosch (1861–1942), a manufacturer of well-designed automotive products, was incensed at Poelzig's dismissal of the automobile as ephemeral art and his denigration of industrial design in comparison to art and architecture.

Poelzig's identification of industrial design with soulless capitalism helps explain why members of left-wing cultural movements that arose after the war such as the Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Workers’Council for Art), a left-wing association of artists and architects, and the Novembergruppe (November Group), a radical artists' organization, expressed such antipathy to industry and adopted instead the pre-industrial community as their embodiment of utopia.

The espousal of Arbeitsrat ideals by Walter Gropius (1883-1969), who became director of the Bauhaus in April 1919 and was also a member of the Werkbund, is an interesting case in point. Before the war, Gropius worked briefly in the office of Peter Behrens, the former design director for the AEG, and designed the bodywork of a locomotive and the interior of a sleeping car for the railway factory in Königsberg. With Adolf Meyer, he also designed the Fagus shoe-last factory, one of the early buildings in Germany with a glass curtain wall. Gropius's shift from an architecture and design practice embedded in industrial culture to a pre-industrial vision of craftsmanship and communitarian life has never been explained and one can only speculate as to why it occurred. As a member of the Arbeitsrat, Gropius may have been influenced by the war's destruction to turn away from big business and embrace instead the vision of a simpler past where Handwerk and community spirit represented the moral high ground. He incorporated many of the Arbeitsrat pronouncements into the founding manifesto of the Bauhaus, among which was the claim that all the crafts should be united under the wing of a great architecture.

Gropius collaborated in the Arbeitsrat with the architect Bruno Taut (188o-1938), one of its founders. In 1919 and 192o, Taut, who was also a member of the Werkbund, published two books, Alpine Architecture (Plate o5) and The Dissolution of Cities, in which he called for a return to the land and the creation of small communities based on craft production and farming. In these communities, Taut envisioned temples of glass, following the mystical theories of glass architecture espoused by the poet and novelist Paul Scheerbart.

Within the Werkbund, Taut and Gropius were part of a radical faction that continued to challenge the organization's traditional ideals. However, by 1921 the Werkbund began to return gradually to its pre-war concern with the quality of Germany's manufactured