shaped by North American tastes, and travel agents promoted the island as a place to unwind and have fun. This image was evident in all the tourist advertising, promotional materials, and souvenirs and was the basis for a series of light-hearted musical films such as Weekend in Havana and others that followed it after World War II.

The tropical paradise that was promoted to the tourists was at odds with the reality of life on the island. Although there was a well-established middle class that complemented the much smaller cadre of wealthy families, major social inequities existed, especially outside Havana within the rural population. From the time of independence, Cuba had a series of corrupt leaders who caused great anger and frustration among the politically active populace. In 1923, during the presidency of Alfredo Zayas, a group of students protested against the government's dishonest practices and this led to the formation of a new political organization, the Falange de Acción Cubana. Two years later the Cuban Communist Party was formed. These organizations were the first to mobilize a new generation of political activists who protested against the corruption of their leaders.

In 1925, Gerardo Machado was elected president. When his first term ended, he refused to step down and continued illegally into a second term. One of the numerous sources of opposition to Machado was the Grupo Minorista (Minority Group), a loose affiliation of writers and artists who came together to promote a new literary and artistic culture, and also continue the resistance to political corruption that had started with the protests of 1923. Machado remained in power until 1933, when the army forced him out. He was replaced by an army sergeant, Fulgencio Batista, who ruled Cuba until 1944 with American support as an unelected strongman behind a facade of puppet presidents. After winning the election of 1952, Batista came to power again and remained in control of the government until an army led by Fidel Castro toppled it in 1959. Batista was known for his friendship with the American gangster Meyer Lansky, who solidified Mafia control of widespread gambling operations in Cuba.

## The decorative arts

When Fernando Aguado y Rico (1859–1941) founded the Escuela Preparatoria de Artes y Oficios (Preparatory School for Arts and Trades) in 1882, his aim was to provide training for young men in carpentry, mechanical pursuits, and industrial chemistry. He envisioned the Escuela as a mechanical training school rather than a school of applied arts, and his curriculum was based on those he observed in Europe and the United States. Free instruction was offered in day and evening classes to students as young as 12 years old. The intent of the program was to produce graduates whose knowledge was less than that of professional engineers and scientists but adequate to work in existing industrial enterprises such as mechanized sugar mills and construction firms. The school was the first in Cuba to prepare students for different trades and was also one of the first trade schools in Latin America. After several years, its name was changed to Escuela Superior de Artes y Oficios de La Habana (Higher Arts and Trades School of Havana) and then in 1938 the name of its founder, Fernando Aguado y Rico, was added.

By 1921, when the commercial and decorative artist Enrique Garcia Cabrera was appointed professor of decorative painting, the school had begun to devote more attention to the decorative arts. While the Escuela Superior started as a school for poor students including many who were children of former slaves, this was not the case for the Academia Nacional de Bella Artes San Alejandro (National San Alejandro Fine Arts Academy), which was founded in 1918. The academy initially offered courses in the fine arts but then added decorative arts classes. Garcia Cabrera taught there after moving from the Escuela Superior de Artes y Oficios.

Initially, American styles in furniture and interiors had great influence on the development of interior decoration in Cuba. The New York firm of

H. F. Huber opened an office in Havana and received a number of commissions to decorate the homes of wealthy Cubans. Others companies followed. Tiffany and Company also opened a branch in Havana, specializing in designs for shop windows and lamps for private residences. Teodoro Bailey (dates unconfirmed) opened a studio that was dedicated to the design of artistic furniture and the decoration of interiors. Bailey had a special interest in Spanish Renaissance styles and advocated heavy wood paneling or molding for dining rooms as an example.

Spanish historicist furniture was popular in Havana, and Cuban craftsmen capably reproduced replicas of original pieces using local woods. For a time, Bailey wrote a regular column on "Architectural Art" for the popular journal Social, where he espoused historic styles. Following the 1925 Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs, however, Social began to promote the French style moderne, later known as Art Deco. It was publicized in other magazines as well including El Arquitecto (The Architect) and the illustrated monthly Arte y Decoración (Art and Decoration), which was first published in 1931.

During the 193os, Cuban architects designed important public buildings and private residences in the Deco style. Prominent among these was the Edificio Bacardi, a corporate office building financed by the Bacardi rum distillery, and the Edificio López Serrano, which housed a number of luxury apartments. Both buildings integrated decorative components such as ornamental stone sculptures, ironwork, carved doorways, tile flooring, and figurative metal panels. Other buildings in the Deco style such as cinemas, hospitals, and various private suburban villas also incorporated such elements.

Carpenters, plasterers, and ironworkers worked independently in cooperative workshops or as employees of large companies. Leading firms included Pi y Brioso S.A. for woodwork; Duque y Compañía for plasterwork; and La Insular, a national factory that specialized in lamps of bronze and wrought iron. The

Cerrajería Artística Basora (Basora Artistic Metalworks) specialized in wrought iron fences that were designed in a modern style. Enrique García Cabrera was well known for his design of figurative panels in nickel silver and other metals. His Deco-inspired panel for the vestibule of the Edificio López Serrano depicts a nude figure in motion framed by geometric linear elements that include three airplanes as decorative motifs.

Furniture in both historic and modern styles was frequently custom-made- or else produced as multiples in small workshops. Designs were generally derived from existing pieces, although adaptation to the hot climate was essential. Designers featured Cuban woods, but they often substituted wicker for upholstery. Among modern styles, the French style moderne was the most admired, while there was little interest in the European Functionalist furniture that Thonet and several other companies distributed. Metal furniture was generally considered to be most appropriate for offices or hospitals. Those companies that did manufacture furniture in metal eschewed Functionalist forms and instead produced custom-made ornate consoles of wrought iron or steel that were often combined with marble tops. Metal furniture was also promoted for outdoor patios.

The one designer who espoused modernism in furniture and interior design was Clara Porset (1895– 1981), who had an atypical education for a Cuban woman. She attended a private secondary school in New York, went on to Columbia University, and then to Paris, where she collaborated on projects with the furniture designer and decorator Henri Rapin (1873– 1939) while also taking art history and theory courses at the École de Beaux Arts and the Sorbonne. After her return to Cuba, she began to design custom furniture for clubs, schools, and private residences. She opposed the historic styles that Teodoro Bailey promoted so vigorously, and began to give public lectures about interiors, substituting the term "interior design" for the more widely used "interior decoration". In 193ı she presented a seminal lecture in Havana on contemporary