II and his pioneering silkscreen technique became an important precedent for Cuban poster artists once the Cuban film industry became active after the revolution.

## Tourist graphics

The massive influx of tourists during the 192os and 193os prompted the need for extensive publicity materials. Since most of the tourists were Americans, these materials had to be printed in English. While artists were sometimes identified, often they were not. Some worked in the United States, where travel promoters created materials for domestic distribution, and in Cuba, others most likely worked for advertising agencies in Havana.

In 1934, the Corporación Nacional de Turismo (National Tourist Corporation) was set up to coordinate the various industries involved with tourism. It replaced an earlier organization, the Comisión Nacional para el Fomento del Turismo, which had been established in 1919. While the official tourist organization published materials for visitors, individual enterprises such as hotels like the Plaza and the Lincoln, restaurants such as La Florida, and bars such as La Bodeguita del Medio created their own brochures, menus, and souvenir labels. As early as 1912, the Cuba Railroad Timetable in English was illustrated with reproductions of romantic paintings of rural landscapes and picturesque small towns. Brochures that advertised hotels, cruises, tours, restaurants, and bars featured several types of illustrations. One type portrayed suave tourist couples sitting in a nightclub or dining on a hotel patio while local performers entertained them. Another featured seductive images of the performers themselves, and a third depicted clichés of traditional Cuban life such as a guajiro or rural dweller from Camaguey in central Cuba doing a folk dance with a woman in a long Spanishstyle dress with her hair pulled back in a bun. Almost all the Cubans portrayed in such publicity were white or at least very light skinned. This unspoken convention of Cuban tourist graphics was in sharp contrast to the representation of blacks and mulattos by some of

Cuba's modern painters and commercial artists who were exploring the Afro-Cuban experience.

## Mexico

Porfirio Díaz, a former general, became president of Mexico in 1876 when he overthrew his rival, Sebastián Lerdo. Díaz ruled Mexico until 191o, during a period known as the Porfiriato. Under him, the country experienced a period of strong economic growth. However, despite the existence of a modest middle class, the divide between the small wealthy elite and the large mass of poor uneducated peasants was extreme.

Díaz governed with a council of científicos or intellectuals who advised him on economic and social planning and policy. He built up Mexico's infrastructure by modernizing the ports, introducing telegraphic communication, and in 19o9, uniting the country's different railroad lines in a single government corporation, Ferrocarriles Nacionales de México (Mexican National Railroads) (FNM).

Díaz courted foreign investors aggressively and they soon dominated the Mexican economy. The Americans and British owned the mines and oilfields, the French were in textiles, the Germans in the production of hardware and pharmaceuticals, and the Spanish were active in food businesses. The economy was transformed during the Díaz regime when large vertically integrated companies that were mainly foreign-owned replaced a production system of small artisan workshops. Factories, whether they produced steel, cement, or beer, had the latest foreign equipment, which was operated and maintained by foreign technicians.

Few Mexican entrepreneurs emerged during the Porfiriato. Most of the wealthy elite owned natural resources or haciendas, which were large land holdings, where they produced agricultural goods. Hacienda owners had little interest in modern agricultural machinery since cheap peasant labor was readily available.

Like presidents before him, Díaz promoted a positive image of Mexico in the world. Consequently the country participated regularly in world's fairs, beginning with London in 1867 and Vienna in 1873. In 1876, the year Díaz became president, Mexico was one of the few Latin American countries to take part in the Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia. At the 1889 World's Fair in Paris, where technological modernization was featured in the Galerie des Machines, the Mexican pavilion was an Aztec Palace, which conveyed the promise of Mexico's future by displaying the glories of its past.

To commemorate the centenary of Mexican independence, which was to be held in 191o, Díaz planned a huge celebration that would display the nation's progress and, as Mauricio Tenorio Trillo has noted, present Mexico to the world as a modern nation. Early in the planning process a proposal for a world's fair was made but this never materialized. Instead, the center of festivities for the centenary was Mexico City. Besides the inauguration of parks and monuments, Díaz introduced industrial projects, founded a National University, and initiated construction of the new imposing Legislative Palace. Unlike the centenary celebrations in some other Latin American countries, no display of domestic industrial products was planned. Most consumer products were still imported and there was not sufficient incentive to manufacture more at home since Mexico did not have a large enough middle class to constitute a viable national market.

The impoverished conditions of the landless masses were a major cause of the Mexican Revolution, which began in 191o, the same year as the Centennial. Díaz was single-minded in his goal of economic development and repressive in his rule. Critics of his regime included Francisco Madero, a leader of the anti-re-election movement, and several rebel leaders including Emiliano Zapata and Pancho Villa, who both commanded bands of guerilla fighters.

Madero challenged Díaz in the election of 1910 and was elected president but had to step down after a short period following attacks from both the right and the left. General Victoriano Huerta seized power but, like Madero, was unable to govern due to fierce opposition from the rebel leaders, who were joined by the politician Venustiano Caranza.

In early 1914, Heurta resigned and continuous fighting followed. Villa's forces were defeated by troops loyal to Caranza, and Zapata's rebel band temporarily withdrew from the conflict. In May 1915, Caranza assumed the presidency and shortly thereafter headed a convention where a new Mexican Constitution was written. Adopted in 1917, it included provisions that gave the government power to redistribute land, restricted the power of the Catholic Church, and introduced new rights for workers.

In 1919, Caranza's troops murdered Zapata, but the following year Caranza made the mistake of attempting to choose his own successor, an act that met with strong opposition and led to his replacement by Álvaro Obregón, a general who launched an ambitious program of social reform that did much to stabilize the political situation. In 1923, an unknown assassin murdered Pancho Villa, thus eliminating the last rebel leader and enabling a peaceful succession of power when Obregón stepped down in 1924 and Plutarco Elías Calles became the new president.

The Obregón government did not adequately address the demands for land redistribution but it made a serious commitment to education. Obregón appointed José Vasconcelos, a writer, philosopher, and political figure, as Secretary of Public Education and appropriated large sums of money for an ambitious program of school construction, recruitment and training of teachers, and special projects such as the Open Air Schools, where thousands of children, especially in rural areas, received artistic training in informal outdoor settings. Vasconcelos created a new type of rural school, La Casa del Pueblo (House of the People), which offered multiple activities in the arts and sports as well as training in sanitation and agriculture. During his four-year tenure as Secretary of Education, Vasconcelos created more than a thousand of these schools.