Vasconcelos also initiated the Mexican mural movement. Diego Rivera, José Orozco, and David Alfaro Siquieros among other artists were hired to create murals in schools and in the new Secretariat of Public Education in Mexico City. Vasconcelos encouraged the muralists to draw on indigenous themes as a means to assert an identity that was true to the spirit of the Latin people. In his 1925 book La Raza Cósmica (The Cosmic Race), written when he was no longer Secretary of Education, Vasconcelos argued that the people of the Americas formed an Ibero-American melting pot. Their racial mingling, he argued, could become the source of a vibrant new civilization.

Land reform had to await the presidency of Lázaro Cárdenas, who governed Mexico from 1934 to 194o. Though Obregón and the presidents who followed him had to distance themselves from the elitist values of the Porfiriato and respond to some demands of the revolution, none took its concerns as seriously as Cárdenas. He appropriated 44 million acres of hacienda land and distributed it to the peasants, largely through collective organizations called ejidos, in which land given to people in individual villages was collectively owned and most often cultivated in common.

Cárdenas also extended additional benefits to urban industrial workers, who gained unprecedented unionization rights and wage increases. However, he was more committed to the development of rural Mexico than to the growth of urban centers or the construction of large industrial plants. In a speech delivered at the University of Virginia in 1935, Ramón Beteta, a prominent official in the Cárdenas government, explained Cárdenas's development policy in terms that were reminiscent of William Morris. Like Morris, he associated capitalism with the evils of industrialization that included urbanism, exploitation, waste, and shoddy goods. Also in the Arts and Crafts spirit, he espoused small industrial communities where goods that satisfied people's needs would be produced. He did not oppose machines but did reject the mechanization of workers. He extolled the craftsman as a producer of beautiful products and observed that their artistic sense would still be expressed if they used machines properly.

Cárdenas may have based his idea for the ejido on the Soviet kolkhoz or collective farm movement that Joseph Stalin initiated at the end of the 192os, the difference being that the Mexican president did not advocate state ownership of the land or accrual of the profits that derived from it. He made a point to distance himself from Stalin by inviting Leon Trotsky, a rival of Stalin's, to come to Mexico where Trotsky was subsequently brutally murdered by a Soviet agent. Cárdenas also opened Mexico to thousands of Republican refugees from the Spanish Civil War, among whom were a number of distinguished artists, designers, and intellectuals. As well, he invited the former Bauhaus director Hannes Meyer, who first visited Mexico in 1938, to found an Institute for Planning and Urbanism at the National Polytechnic Institute in Mexico City, which Meyer did the following year. In 1944-1945, Meyer headed the Hospital Planning Commission, which established the construction requirements for all Mexican hospitals.

In March 1938, Cárdenas expropriated all of Mexico's oil resources and then nationalized the American and Anglo-Dutch oil companies. Several months later he created Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), a government company that had exclusive rights to extract, refine, and sell Mexican oil. His successor was Manuel Ávila Camacho, who slowed down the pace of land reform and introduced a massive literacy campaign but spent much of his presidency engaged with issues related to World War II.

## Manufacturing, decorative arts, and design

Mexico's production of consumer goods before World War II was limited. The urban middle class expanded during the 192os and 193os, but the largest segment of the population was rural and poor. William Beezley describes rural dwellers as living for the most part