without chairs, tables, or beds, sleeping on mats called petates and cooking with earthen pottery.

The middle class shopped in the grand urban department stores——El Puerto de Liverpool (Port of Liverpool), El Palacio de Hierro (The Iron Palace), and El Centro Mercantil (The Mercantile Center). These stores carried a wide range of goods from Europe and the United States. They also manufactured goods in their own workshops. The Palacio de Hierro, for example, announced in its catalog of 1904 that it had the capability to produce furniture in various styles with advanced machinery and local materials at prices lower than competition from abroad.

Some Mexican craftsmen and decorative artists were aware of the Art Deco style but it was not widely used in the design of furniture or other consumer products. In France, decorative artists frequently appropriated motifs from non-European cultures, which they combined with exotic materials and modern forms. Deco designers in Mexico tended to adopt local folkloric or pre-Hispanic motifs, attempting as in other Latin American countries to ally modernism and nationalism. Ceramists incorporated motifs from Mayan or Aztec pottery with reasonable success since the motifs were subordinated to the forms of simple containers, but the design of custom furniture with such motifs was less successful. A living room suite with stepped Aztec designs appended to the chair and bench forms, for example, displayed the same inappropriate adaptations of historic ornament that were rampant during the Victorian era in Europe. Pre-Hispanic ornament was also adopted for the Mexican government's neo-Mayan pavilion at the 1929 Iberoamerican Exhibition in Seville, Spain. Designed by Manuel Amáblis (1883-d.o.d unconfirmed), the pavilion had a plan that was based on a Nahuatl symbol, while its extensive ornament was superficially grafted onto a modern building that had little relation to a Mayan temple.

Art Deco did, however, have a strong influence on modern Mexican architecture and was evident in the design of some public buildings and private residences in Mexico City. Among the public buildings, the Edificio de la Alianza de Ferrocarrileros Mexicanos, the Estación de Policia y Bomberos, the Central de Teléfonos Antonio Caso, and the Banco de Mexico are prominent examples. Private residences with Deco elements were built in several developments or colonias in Mexico City. Many of these buildings included work by skilled craftsmen. Ironworkers created intricately designed gates and railings, modern lighting fixtures were custom-made, woodworkers installed decorative paneling, and ceramists created external ornament that might include pre-Hispanic iconography or, in the case of the Oficinas de Teléfonos, reliefs of telephones set against maps of Mexico. Large concrete Deco letters in relief were also incorporated into the facades of some buildings.

## Agricultural equipment

The design of agricultural equipment changed slowly. In the 189os the predominant implement was a singlehandled plow that farmers hooked to the horns of an ox that pushed rather than pulled it. When two-handled plows were imported, peasants often chopped off one of the handles so that the plow resembled the ones they were already accustomed to. An American farm implement company began to manufacture one-handled plows for export and these survived well into the 2oth century. Local factories also started to make farm equipment and by the end of the 193os, about 15 were doing so. They were small establishments and dedicated their production primarily to the traditional plows, although they produced other agricultural tools in limited quantities. No Mexican factories made tractors. To implement his agricultural reforms, Lázaro Cárdenas had to import large numbers of these, which he leased to the ejidos.

## Cars and airplanes

As elsewhere in Latin America, Mexico did not manufacture its own automobiles in the period before World War II, although the major American