automobile companies opened assembly plants there. Buick was the first in 1922, followed in 1925 by the Ford Motor Company, and Chrysler around 1937. At the beginning of the 192os a Mexican firm attempted to market an automobile designed specifically for domestic consumption. Named the Anáhuac after a center of Aztec civilization, it was to have been made by an American company but only four were ever built.

Earlier, in 1915, President Carranza authorized the establishment of the Talleres Nacionales de Construcciones Aeronáuticas (TNCA) (National Workshop for Aeronautic Construction), which launched the military aviation industry in Mexico. The TNCA was overseen by Gustavo Salinas, head of the government's new Department of Aeronautics, and was directed by two engineers, a Mexican, Juan Guillermo Villasana (dates unconfirmed) and an Italian, Francisco Santarini (1883-1954). Villasana was a pioneer of Mexican aviation who had been recognized around 1912 for an original propeller design that was made of several different woods and enabled a plane to rise and descend more easily. Dubbed the Anáhuac propeller, it became widely known in the aviation field.

The TNCA began as a repair and maintenance shop for the few foreign planes that the government owned, but it soon began to produce planes of its own design. The workshop is noteworthy for its rational division of technical, mechanical, and design tasks, which facilitated the recruitment of personnel with specialized skills. In 1916, the TNCA completed its first two planes, one a biplane that initiated its Series A. The planes were fitted with foreign engines but the workshop made a breakthrough the following year when it produced a Series A plane made entirely with parts that had been designed in Mexico, specifically the Anáhuac propeller and a rotary engine that also bore a patriotic name—Azatl ("white heron" in the Náhuatl language).

For the next several years, the workshop continued to design and manufacture more airplanes— additional Series A biplanes, "parasol” planes in the H Series, and several smaller aircraft known as Series

C. The workshop had received unqualified support from President Carranza but attitudes began to change after he left office and was assassinated in 192o. The TNCA designed and produced new planes including the Series B and Series E, but it also began to copy foreign aircraft and use engines from abroad for some of its own models. By the time the workshop closed in 194o, the government had ceased to produce its own planes and reverted to its earlier policy of purchasing aircraft abroad.

## Graphic design

## Magazines, journals, and newspapers

With the end of the Díaz regime in 191o and the beginning of the Mexican Revolution, various magazines and newspapers that had flourished under Díaz either ceased publication or did so within several years. A number of illustrated magazines were published during the Díaz years. Among them, the most popular was El Mundo Ilustrado (The World Illustrated), a weekly that began as El Mundo Semanario Ilustrado in 1894 and changed its name in 19oo. Despite its extensive attention to fashion and social events, El Mundo Ilustrado was a serious publication that also covered the economy, science, literature, and the arts (Fig. 29.o5). Its aim was to represent the progress and modernity of the Díaz regime rather than offer a critical counterpoint to it.

The magazine was printed with the latest imported equipment, including rotary presses and linotype machines. There were three departments for visual production: one that produced original artwork, another that made engravings, and a third for photography. These departments sometimes borrowed photographs from readers to use as the basis for engravings. Original drawings and engravings were also commissioned from established artists, many of whom had studied at the Academia San Carlos in Mexico City and did commercial art to make a living. Among them were Julio Ruelas (1870–1907), Antonio Gedovius (dates unconfirmed), and Antonio Bribiesca (dates