## Advertising

During the Díaz regime, the audience for advertising was predominantly the urban middle class, which was relatively modest in size compared to the large number of rural peasants. Unlike Paris and other cosmopolitan cities, however, where posters announcing new products were displayed regularly on kiosks and billboards, advertising in Mexico appeared primarily in the weekly magazines and the daily newspapers. During the Porfiriato, when most goods were imported, many ads were created abroad, primarily in France and the United States, and then adapted with Spanishlanguage copy for publication in Mexico. Among the indigenous companies producing their own advertising were El Buen Tono, Mexico's largest cigarette company, and various breweries like Compañía Cervecera Toluca and Cervecería Cuauhtémoc Moctezuma. The large department stores also had publicity departments, where they created their own advertisements and catalogs.

Initially, independent advertising agencies would solicit and acquire advertisements for individual publications or groups of publications. These agencies included Tip Artística de México, the Compañía Anunciadora Mexicana, the Mexican General Advertising Company, and B. & G. Goetschel. Given the lack of commercial art studios, ads were frequently produced in lithography and photoengraving shops and other printing establishments, which would hire artists to create the designs. The artist Alfredo Flores, a specialist in Art Nouveau designs, was affiliated, for example, with the printer Armando Salcedo. Various weekly magazines at the turn of the century, notably the Revista Moderna, published advertisements that were heavily influenced by French Symbolism and Art Nouveau. Their leading advertising designers were the same artists who created their illustrations and vignettes: Julio Ruelas, Roberto Montenegro $\left( \mathrm { I } 8 8 5 \mathrm { - } \mathrm { I } 9 6 8 \right)$ Germán Gedovius (1867- 1937), Alberto Garduño $\left( \mathrm { I 8 8 5 - I 9 4 8 } \right)$ Rafael de Zayas (1880–1961), and also Alberto Flores.

As Julieta Ortiz Gaitán has shown, the artists produced complete compositions with images and lettering, although the quality of the latter varied greatly. The iconography was often drawn from the tradition of painting and frequently had little to do with the product advertised. Julio Ruelas, for example, created several ads for the Banco Minero de Chihuahua (Miner's Bank of Chihuahua) that depicted a semi-nude man with a hammer and chisel, who represented the bank's funding of successful mining operations. Another ad by Ruelas for a soap company showed a winged fairy proffering an array of soaps to a seated woman in a flowing classical garment with one breast exposed. More successful was Roberto Montenegro's Symbolist-inspired advertisement for La Droguería de la Profesa that showed a woman with her eyes closed holding a bouquet of flowers from which arises a willo'-the-wisp with a bottle of perfume.

With the ending of the Porfiriato and the ensuing transitional period during the revolution, advertising was in a fluid state. During the 192os and 1930s, however, new styles emerged with strong influences from the current advertising tendencies in the United States and Europe. This resulted in new ways of depicting products and their relations to consumers as well as in new drawing styles; realism, on the one hand, coming from American advertising, and Art Deco, on the other, coming from France. Photography was also used extensively.

One of the leading advertising agencies was Maxim's, which was founded in 19o9 by the Spanish artist Máximo Ramos (dates unconfirmed). Other agencies included Excélsior Publicidad, LBA Publicistas, and Mike Studio. Maxim's was among the first agencies in Mexico to produce its own artwork. The most prominent artist in the studio was Manuel Agustín López (dates unconfirmed), known as Cav. He pioneered Maxim's geometric style, which was most evident in its ads for the men's clothing company Bücher Brothers. These ads featured an elegantly dressed gentleman, reminiscent of Ludwig Hohlwein's male figures, beside a geometric form—whether a