circle, square, or diamond—which was set against a solid background. The style was also evident in work by other artists in the agency such as Carlos Neve (dates unconfirmed), whose ads for the men's hat retailer Casa Tardan featured a male silhouette in black as a trademark. While the ads produced by Maxim's employed sophisticated contemporary imagery, the typography was extremely weak when compared to some other ads that adopted Art Deco lettering and used it in a way that was more compatible with the imagery. French fashion illustration and poster art especially drawings by Erté and posters by Charles Gesmar—remained a strong influence on the depiction of women. Ludwig Hohlwein was a comparable influence on the portrayal of men, not only in the ads by Cav. López but also in those for Stetson hats drawn by Gómes Linares (dates unconfirmed). James Leyendecker's Arrow Collar man was also popular in Spanish versions of the American ads.

One consequence of the Mexican Revolution was a new pride in the depiction of national identity. Thus various advertisements, particularly for products made in Mexico, featured Mexican cowboys or charros, and women in traditional dress who were known as chinas poblanas. We can contrast these nationalistic ads with another group that promoted American products, where human figures were generic modern types without a specific nationality. As in other Latin American countries in the period after World War I, the presence of goods from the United States increased. Consequently many ads for American products, such as Palmolive Soap, Westinghouse and Philco radios, Victor Phonographs, Stetson Hats, and Arrow Collars, appeared. Mexican illustrators drew some and others were based on American ads in which Spanish text was substituted.

## Calendar art

Another popular means of advertising was the calendar. Its precedent was the late 19th-century almanac, which contained information about the weather, religious festivals, preferred times for planting, and other advice in addition to advertising. What followed the almanac was the illustrated calendar or "chromo" which began to achieve popularity in the 193os. The attraction to the chromos" was part of a growing sense of identity or "Mexicanidad," which led to the rejection of American calendars with recycled images that had previously dominated the market.

Calendars were of two types. One featured a custom illustration that a particular company commissioned. The second type was generic and could be ordered by a customer whose company name would be printed on the calendar. The first company to print calendars in Mexico City was Enseñanza Objectiva, a print shop that was founded in 1922 and began to produce calendars in 1935. The other leading calendar printers were Litografía Latina (Latin Lithography), a small company that had earlier built a reputation printing bottle labels and packaging, and Galas de México, founded in r913 and soon thereafter expanded to other countries in Latin America.

Principal advertisers were cigarette and beer companies, who embedded their products in nationalistic imagery. The iconography of the chromos" embodied different myths that ranged from pre-Hispanic legends to scenes of smiling rural workers and Mexican charros. Though not commissioned by the government, the popular images reinforced official efforts to promote a national identity. One of the most popular images was done for El Aguila (The Eagle) Cigarettes in 1941. Entitled La leyenda de los volcanes (Legend of the Volcanoes), it depicts a scene from the legend of Iztacíhuatl, which recounts the story of an Aztec princesss who married a prince from another tribe. When she died, he brought her body to the peak of a volcano, placed it on a bed of flowers, and then lay down next to her to die. The painting by Jesús de la Helguera (1910–1971) exploited the erotic elements of the story through the artist's depiction of the princess's voluptuous pose and the prince's muscular physique.