old gunslinger. The TGP continued the strong antifascist commitment of the LEAR, which was reflected in the imagery of many of the early prints. Alfredo Zalce, for example, who had previously published caricatures in Multicolor and other popular magazines, produced a broadside with comic drawings entitled Calaveras Vaciladoras de la Guerra (Vacillating Calaveras Against the War).

## Brazil

After a coup overthrew the Brazilian monarchy in 1889 and the country became a republic, modernization accelerated. At the beginning of the 2oth century, coffee was the country's leading export and the success of the coffee industry contributed to expanded urbanization in Rio de Janeiro, which became the country's capital, and Sao Paulo, both located in coffee-producing states. Emigrants came to Brazil in increasing numbers, largely from Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Germany, and as in Argentina and Uruguay, many established their own enterprises. The printing industry in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, for example, was largely founded by immigrants, especially Italians.

With urban growth, the division between the living standards of city and country dwellers increased. Modernization continued in the cities, particularly in the arts, business, and the development of progressive social mores and political values. Meanwhile, society in rural areas remained undeveloped. Large numbers of country dwellers worked under difficult conditions for wealthy owners of cattle farms, coffee plantations, and other agricultural enterprises. Despite the predominance of agricultural exports in the Brazilian economy, a growing interest in industry also existed, although there was little incentive to emphasize it until after World War I, when foreign imports dropped off and the need for domestic products became stronger.

Throughout the 192os, various groups including some military officers challenged the prevailing politicians with demands for a stronger central government, agrarian reform, better working conditions, and a greater commitment to industrialization. In 193o, the ruling elite was ousted and Getúlio Vargas, former governor of Brazil's southernmost state, Rio Grande do Sul, became the new president. In 1937, Vargas assumed dictatorial powers and established the Estado Novo (New State), which he ruled until a military coup forced him to resign in 1945. Vargas had a strong commitment to industrialization and he fostered centralized efforts to increase Brazil's industrial independence, particularly in the production of military equipment. During his regime, he fostered a national steel industry, established the Fábrica Nacional de Motores (National Motor Factory), and supported the most advanced aircraft industry in Latin America.

## Decorative arts and furniture

The first Brazilian training school for skilled workers in the decorative arts was the Liceu de Artes e Ofícios de Sao Paulo (Sao Paulo School of Arts and Trades), which began as the Society for the Propagation of Popular Instruction in 1873 and then changed its name in 1882, when the curriculum was reformed. Modeled on the ideals of William Morris and the British Arts and Crafts movement, the school aimed to train artisans and workers for local industries. It introduced a curriculum that included some mechanical design as well as numerous courses in fields such as cabinetmaking, wood and metalworking, and locksmithing. In 1895, the school underwent a broader reform under the direction of an architect-engineer, Francisco de Paula Ramos de Azevedo (1851-1928), who wanted to create a School of Fine Arts. He introduced courses in drawing, clay and plaster modeling, and painting, which he combined with professional training in carpentry, cabinetmaking, metal and woodworking, and the graphic arts among other courses. After 1905, the Liceu began to license and sell the furniture and other products from its workshops just as the Bauhaus would do some years later.

The school had its own building, which Ramos de Azevedo and a collaborator, Domiziano Rossi (1865–192o), designed in an eclectic Italian style. By 1905, students and graduates were involved in the design of decorative elements for numerous public buildings in Sao Paulo. These projects included facade ornaments, ironwork, and furniture, which were also commissioned for various private residences, along with ceramic tiles and vases and cast bronze ornaments. The enormous chandelier and the furniture of the Sao Paulo Municipal Theater were produced at the school as were the decorative friezes of the building that the Banco de Sao Paulo occupied. Art Nouveau influences could be seen in some of the villas that Sao Paulo coffee magnates and other entrepreneurs commissioned around the turn of the century, and the style was found as well in other parts of Brazil.

Similar to architecture, where its influence was modest, Art Nouveau did not have a great impact on the decorative arts. In ceramics, the leading Brazilian figures were Teodoro Braga (1872–1935), his student Manoel Pastana (r888–d.o.d. unconfirmed), and Fernando Correia Dias (1893–1935), all of whom trained as painters. Working in other media as well, they were more interested in the indigenous examples from Brazil's nativist cultures than they were in European models. Braga and Pastana were from Belém in the Amazon region and made strong references to the region's pre-Columbian Marajoara culture in their work. Ceramic vases from the early 192os that are attributed to Braga display raised figures of Amazonian fauna—notably beetles and alligators—although as scholar Paulo Herkenhoff points out, Braga did not develop the symbolic meanings of these figures as was the case in the original Marajoara pottery. In 1927, when he participated in the applied arts section of the National Salon of Fine Arts in Rio de Janeiro, Braga showed a group of vases in wrought metal for which he transformed the symbolic language of Marajoara ornamentation into modern motifs that suggested Art Deco. Braga later taught at the Escola Paulista de Belas Artes (Sao Paulo School of Fine Arts), which had been founded in 1925 and where the modern architect and city planner Lucio Costa (1902–1998) was briefly the director in 1930.

Manoel Pastana, like Braga, produced vases and other objects in metal that had applied animal forms. A number of these objects recreate symbols and legends from Amazonian tribes. Besides his completed work, Pastana made many renderings of objects that were decorated with figures of Amazonian flora and fauna. These ranged from furniture and lamps to coffee and tea sets, trays, and also parasols. Pastana's designs were eccentric. Had they been produced, they would have been regarded as novelties rather than modern decorative objects. His drawing for a coffee and tea set with toucan and palm tree motifs, for example, recalls the Wedgwood teapots whose forms were derived from fruits and vegetables.

The artist Fernando Correia Dias (1893-1935), who emigrated to Rio de Janeiro from Portugal in 1914, was also known for ceramic pots, plates, and urns that were painted with native motifs. Though Portuguese, Correia Dias adapted his designs from the same sources as did Braga and Pastana. Primarily a graphic designer, he also drew numerous vignettes based on Marajoara patterns or Amazonian flora or fauna. Dias characterized his vignettes and ceramic designs as "nationalist," and considered them a contribution to a new Brazilian cultural identity.

By contrast, the furniture industry adopted a wide range of European styles from conventional historic periods to Art Deco and German modernism. One of the large firms that specialized in furniture and interiors in historic styles was Laubisch, Hirth and Company, which employed more than 35o people including cabinetmakers, carpenters, upholsterers, and others who reproduced existing historic models as custom pieces for the firm's clients.

European modern design made its first impact in Brazil through the work of John Graz (1891–1980), a Swiss artist who came to Sao Paulo in 192o. He had studied decorative arts at the École de Beaux Arts in Geneva and was then a student of decorative art, poster design, and advertising at the School of Fine Arts in Munich, where he became familiar with the modern poster work of Ludwig Hohlwein and others.

Subsequently, Graz learned about the Cubists and Fauves in Paris before he began a successful career as a commercial and decorative artist and illustrator in Geneva. After he came to Sao Paulo, he married the Brazilian craftswoman and decorative artist Regina Gomide (1897–1973), whom he had met several years earlier in Europe and with whom he would collaborate on numerous projects for interiors.

Initially Graz showed his paintings and worked as an illustrator, but by the late 192os he began to focus on interior design. He adopted visual motifs from the Cubists and the French Art Deco designers, while also applying geometric forms where appropriate. His clients tended to be wealthy Paulistas for whom he designed homes with everything from metal gates painted murals, and stained-glass windows to modern furniture, bathroom fixtures, and gardens. Graz is sometimes considered to be Brazil's first comprehensive designer as well as the first in Brazil to use metal in interior design. He incorporated metal tubing into some of his furniture and also adopted copper and steel sheeting for other decorative purposes. Regina Gomide worked in various decorative arts. She made pillows and tapestries that featured modern motifs and also designed rugs with geometric forms.

Along with Graz and Gomide, various other architects, artists, and designers were interested in the modern interior. During the 193os, the painter and sculptor Cássio M'Boi (19o3-d.o.d unconfirmed) created a series of carpets with strong geometric designs, along with occasional furniture pieces. A number of artists and architects designed modern furniture for their own homes and for occasional clients. Among them was the Russian émigré architect Gregori Warchavchik (1896-1972), who introduced modern architecture to Brazil. He came to Sao Paulo in 1923 and by 1928 he had built a house for himself, which was considered to be the first modern residence in the country. Two years later he built a second house, the Casa Modernista, which he opened to the public as an exhibition home. He designed most of the modern furniture that was displayed in its various rooms, thus giving the public a chance to see what a modern interior might look like.

As Maria Cecilia Loschiavo dos Santos has noted, Warchavchik developed a complete range of furniture between 1928 and 1933, with all pieces executed according to modernist principles. He worked in wood, using geometric planes and volumes to create tables, chairs, desks, and shelves. He also designed chairs with curved chrome tubing and upholstered seats. For the reading room of the Paulista Association of Medicine, Warchavchik created a long table and chairs consisting mainly of wooden planes in varied shapes. But the chairs had planar siding that was wider than necessary, giving them a ponderous appearance despite the designer's rationalist intentions.

Another designer of modern furniture was the Lithuanian artist Lasar Segall (1891-1957), who first visited Brazil in 1912 and returned to stay in 1923. Though primarily a painter—Segal was a founder of the Dresden Secession—he was also interested in furniture design, particularly for his own residence, and relied on geometry, although he was not as reductive as Warchavchik. The architect Henrique Mindlin (191- 1971), who taught at the Mackenzie Engineering School, also experimented with modern furniture, producing pieces for several clients whose houses he designed. Similar to other modernist furniture designers, Mindlin featured planar surfaces, but his background in engineering as well as architecture enabled him to consider some subtle structural elements that made his work distinctive. By contrast, the furniture designs of the Brazilian architect Flávio de Carvalho (1899-1973) were more eccentric than those of the other modernists due to his strong interest in individual expression.

The pieces by these architects and artists were important for the future of Brazilian furniture design even though they were not mass-produced. Their effect on the furniture industry was to disencumber other