the country. In addition, large vessels were produced in private shipyards such as that of M. Buarque and Company.

## Manufacturing and the Estado Novo

Shortly after Getúlio Vargas assumed dictatorial powers in 1937, the new constitution gave the state the right to intervene in the economy when it saw fit. The government's authoritarian and technocratic role was intended to make Brazil self-sufficient in consumer goods, but it also appealed to the military, which was able to command basic industries to produce its own materiel. The term "nationalization" was adopted, not to mean complete government control of industry but instead to signify the adoption whenever possible of local raw materials and semi-finished components.

The Vargas administration was particularly interested in large enterprises. Among its projects were the nation's first integrated steel mill in Volta Redonda and the National Motor Factory, which was established in 1943. The design demands of the regime were essentially for engineers, who were required for shipbuilding railroad expansion, weapons manufacture, and the new aircraft industry. In 193o, the army had established the Escola Técnica do Exército (Military Technical School), where it trained staff for factories and industrial laboratories. Following the design of Brazil's first aircraft by Antonio Guedez Muniz (1900-1985), the technical school created a program in aeronautical engineering.

Guedez Muniz was the pioneer of the Brazilian aircraft industry. He designed his first airplanes while attending the School of Aeronautics in France. In 1935, back in Brazil, he supervised the production of two prototypes of his first Brazilian plane, the M-7. For the design, he had to coordinate the efforts of several different enterprises, which produced both the technical components and the fabric for the wing skin. Guedez Muniz also advocated the use of Brazilian woods for the frames. In 1936, with the support of Getúlio Vargas, the Companhia Nacional de Navegação Aérea (National Company for Aerial Navigation) (CNNA)

manufactured the first two of Guedez Muniz's M-7 aircraft and later constructed others. The CNNA also produced several of his subsequent designs—the M-9, and then the M-1o and M-1. The latter was a small monoplane similar to the Piper Cub, which was made entirely of Brazilian woods. The Empresa Aeronáutica Ypiranga was a company that initially made two gliders, known as Primary and Secondary, which were both copied from German examples. The firm also produced the prototype of a single-engine biplane but only five were built.

## Exhibitions during the 1930s

When Vargas came to power in 193o, he had no strong interest in national or international exhibitions. Brazil did not participate in either the Century of Progress Exhibition in Chicago (1933-1934) or the Brussels World's Fair in 1935, but in 1936, Vargas supported a proposal for a national event, the Exposição do Estado Novo (Exhibition of the New State). The proposal was approved, planning initiated, and the exhibition opened in December 1938 in Rio de Janeiro. Its purpose was to counter the divided political culture of the previous period and project the image of a unified political state that had eliminated regional differences. The new unity was symbolized by a monumental rectilinear tower that rose above the exhibition entrance, bearing in large relief letters the words "O Novo Brasil 1930-1938" ("The New Brazil 1930–1938"). The various pavilions featured extensive displays of information graphics—graphs, maps, photographs, and models that publicized the achievements of the Vargas regime.

Historian Daryle Williams has noted that the Exposição do Estado Novo was a prelude to the positive national image that the Vargas regime would present at three very different events—the Golden Gate International Exhibition in San Francisco and the New York World's Fair, known as the "World of Tomorrow," both in 1939, and the Exposição do Mundo Português (Exhibition of the Portuguese World) in Lisbon the following year. For the two American fairs, the regime