presented the image of a modern Latin American nation that could hold its own with its North American counterpart, while for the Lisbon exhibition, which served its own propaganda purposes for Portugal's dictator António de Oliveira Salazar (see Chapter 27), Brazil had the opportunity to assert its role as a powerful presence in the Portuguese-speaking world.

The New York pavilion was designed by architects Lucio Costa (1902–1998) and Oscar Niemeyer (1907– 2012), both strong disciples of Le Corbusier. Costa had led the team that developed the new Ministry of Education and Health, a Corbusian structure that was among the first modern buildings in Latin America. In order to create a modern pavilion for the New York fair, the government had to overturn a decree that mandated the design of all buildings representing Brazil abroad to be in the Neo-Colonial style. Wishing to draw attention away from the fact that the Vargas regime was a dictatorship, the government adopted modernism as the prevailing trope of it exhibit. This was evident first of all in the building, whose basic modernist rhetoric eschewed any association with Spanish-American, colonial, or nativist styles. The exhibit inside featured a display of Brazilian commodities that included tropical hardwoods, fibers, and mineral ore. At this stage of industrial development, Brazil had little to show in the way of manufactured goods that were worthy of export. Instead, the exhibit featured raw materials and their potential industrial applications. The exhibition strategy was to present these materials in a simple manner and to avoid the cluttered rhetoric of a typical museum display. Central to the exhibit besides raw materials was coffee, still Brazils principal consumer product. The pavilion featured a display that explained the coffee-growing cycle and had a coffee bar that was decorated with tropical motifs.

The image of Latin American modernism that the pavilion projected was influential in developing numerous cultural ties between Brazil and the United States. Of particular significance was the Brazil Builds exhibition that the Museum of Modern Art presented in 1943. It contrasted a broad panorama of new buildings that had been constructed during the Vargas years with the richness of Brazil's architectural past. The exhibit was part of President Franklin Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy, which also included a visit by Walt Disney to Latin America to explore possible cooperative projects. One result was Disney's creation of the animated Brazilian parrot Zé Carioca, who was inspired by a drawing sent to him by the Brazilian caricaturist J. Carlos. Zé Carioca first appeared in the Disney cartoon Saludos Amigos in 1942 with singer Carmen Miranda, the "Brazilian Bombshell."

The Brazilian pavilion for Lisbon showed no traces of the modernism that characterized Costa's and Niemeyer's New York building. Its entrance, in fact, signified that Brazil's cultural roots preceded the arrival of the Portuguese by depicting sculptural figures that were drawn from the pre-Columbian Marajoara civilization. These were designed by architect Roberto Lacombe (dates unconfirmed) who was also in charge of creating the interior exhibit, which featured separate displays that were dedicated to health reform, transportation, the press, and related topics. Whereas, the interior design of the New York pavilion played down the dictatorial presence of Vargas, the Lisbon pavilion featured a large photomontage mural that chronicled the achievements of the Vargas regime. The differences in design between the New York and Lisbon pavilions showed how the Vargas regime was navigating between the image of a Latin American nation that could serve as a useful ally to American interests——which it did during World War II—and a country that presented itself to its former colonial occupier as a strong unified nation whose coherence was enforced by the authoritarian power of Getúlio Vargas.

## Graphic design

## The influence of the Semana de Arte Moderna

Modern art was introduced to Brazil through the Semana de Arte Moderna (Modern Art Week), held in Sao Paulo in 1922 in conjunction with the

International Exhibition of the Centennial of Brazilian Independence, which was intended to commemorate Brazil's accomplishments since gaining independence from Portugal. In its own way, the Modern Art Week participated in this declaration of independence. The concern of the organizers was to distinguish modernism in Brazil from its origins in Europe. Most of the artists involved had studied or traveled in Europe and their intent in embracing Brazilian culture was not to create a nostalgic nativist art. Rather, they sought to define modernism with a Brazilian character, not only in painting and sculpture but in architecture, literature, and music as well.

This intent was evident even in the design of the catalog cover by Emiliano Di Cavalcanti (1897-1967), one of the Modern Art Week organizers, which featured a loosely rendered ink drawing of a nude woman on a pedestal surrounded by foliage and decorative forms. By the time of the Modern Art Week, Di Cavalcanti had already established himself as a caricaturist and illustrator as well as a painter. His drawings graced the covers of the leading Sao Paulo publications, while he assumed a more serious style of illustration for books and magazines that was influenced by the stark black and white contrasts of Aubrey Beardsley as well as other European artists. His book covers drew on abstract design elements and lettering associated with avant-garde art.

Leading artists and theorists besides Di Cavalcanti who participated in the Modern Art Week include the poet and polemicist Oswald de Andrade (1890-1954), author of the manifesto Pau-Brasil (Brazil Wood) of 1924 and the "Manifesto Antropófago" ("Cannibal Manifesto") of 1928; poet, novelist, art historian, and critic Mário de Andrade (1893-1945), who published the seminal novel Macunaíma in 1928; the painters Anita Malfatti (1889-1964), considered to be the first Brazilian artist to introduce modern pictorial ideas from abroad, and Tarsila do Amaral (1886–1973); and the poet and painter Paulo Menotti Del Picchia (1892–1988). All were active in the publishing world either as authors, book designers, or illustrators, and their books were landmarks of modern design in Latin America. In his Pau-Brasil manifesto and the "Manifesto Antropófago", Oswald de Andrade characterized Brazilian modernism by its ability to cannibalize European culture for its own ends. With this argument, he and others associated with the Brazilian modern movement were asserting simultaneously their desire to be modern and their refusal to adopt European precedents.

The art critic P. M. Bardi has noted that the new visual ideas that were introduced in the Modern Art Week exhibition soon began to penetrate the world of book and magazine publishing and consequently had a considerable effect on popular graphic styles. Following the event, some of the organizers including Mário de Andrade launched a cultural review, which they called Klaxon to signal their intent to noisily proclaim the advent of a new culture. The review, which lasted for only nine issues, radically introduced the visual rhetoric of the Soviet avant-garde, particularly the design of the first cover with its large “A" that ran the length of the page and its limit to black, white, and red, both of which seem to be indirect quotations from El Lissitzky's avant-garde books of the same period (Fig. 29.15). Similarly, the way the cover design incorporated a single letter in multiple words recalled Lissitzky's idea of visual economy.

Klaxon published articles and poetry in various languages and brought numerous examples of European avant-garde writing to the attention of its Brazilian readers. However, the editors, among whom Mário de Andrade was a central figure, were adamant in separating themselves from any particular avant-garde movements. "Klaxon,"they declared, "is klaxonist." The review's advertising was also innovative and even included a parody ad for a factory that produced sonnets, madrigals, ballads, and quadrinhas, a poetic form with four stanzas. 'Thus, the Constructivist rhetoric of the cover was mingled with a Dada spirit that was evident as well in the occasional page with an eclectic mix of types.