de Sao Paulo (Sao Paulo School of Arts and Trades). It had a well-equipped graphic studio and print shop, where students and their teachers produced work of the highest quality. Despite the plethora of printing enterprises in Brazil, however, there was an absence of type foundries. Type was imported from abroad, mainly from France but also from Germany. Even experimental publications like Klaxon had to depend on whichever imported fonts were available in a particular print shop.

## Book publishing and design

At the end of World War I, the book trade in Brazil was still not well developed. In fact, some books by Brazilian authors were published in Europe and then distributed at home. There were few bookshops or other outlets for selling books and this made distribution difficult. Art Nouveau and occasionally the Arts and Crafts aesthetic of William Morris were strong influences on the design of book covers and some layouts. This was evident in the cover and layout that Fernando Correia Dias created for Nos (Us), a book of poems by Guilherme d’Almeida, in 1917. The cover, which recalls the work of the American Arts and Crafts designer Will Bradley as well as the drawing style of Aubrey Beardsley, featured the title in red decorative letters, a stark black and white drawing of a woman in a tragic posture, and the author's name in stylized medieval letters. The text layout had wide spacing between the lines of type, considerable white space, and decorative initials such as might be found in the Kelmscott Press books of William Morris. Correia Dias's cover and illustrations for this book were among the many he did for books and magazines in the ensuing years. His versatility was typical of numerous Brazilian artists and illustrators who moved easily back and forth between fine art, book publishing, and the world of magazine design. The Beardsley influence was more directly evident in Emiliano de Cavalcanti's early work, particularly his title page for Oscar Wilde's Ballad of Reading Gaol of 1919 and his illustrations for the same author's partially completed play, A Florentine Tragedy, of 1924.

The man who is often credited with launching modern Brazilian publishing is José Bento Monteiro Lobato (1882–1948), an author and journalist who was also a staunch nationalist. In 1918, Monteiro Lobato published a highly successful collection of stories, Urupês (White Fungus), about life in the Brazilian interior. The book served as a rallying cry for the emerging nationalist movement. It had a cover, which depicted typical Brazilian vegetation, and illustrations by the painter José Wasth Rodrigues (1891–1957). At the time Urupês was published, Monteiro Lobato bought the journal Revista do Brasil for which he established a new layout, cover design, and the use of vignettes as decorative elements. His design sense was significantly different from the modernists, however, and in 1917 he achieved great notoriety by writing a harsh review of the artist Anita Malfatti's first exhibition after her return from abroad, claiming that her visual distortions were the result of mental disturbances.

Monteiro Lobato began to develop a publishing enterprise, which he revolutionized in a number of ways. One was to focus more attention on his books' cover designs, which at the time were mainly reproductions of their title pages on gray or yellow paper. Monteiro Lobato also modernized the layouts of his books along with the Revista do Brasil, changing from crowded page designs to cleanly designed typographic spreads. He employed Juvenal Prado (1895-198o) to transform the mundane lettering on the cover of Revista do Brasil to a more ornate and decorative design. Prado also created a number of decorative tailpieces for the magazine. Though he specialized in lettering and ornamental design, he produced narrative covers and illustrations as well.

Monteiro Lobato commissioned leading artists, caricaturists, and illustrators to design his book covers. Most were best known at the time as contributors to Brazil's popular magazines. They included Antônio Paim Viera (1895–1988), Mick Carnicelli (1893–1967), and Benedito Carneiro Bastos Barreto (1896-1947), known as Belmonte. Within several years, Monteiro

Lobato had made extensive investments in printing equipment and around 1926 joined with a partner to form the Companhia Editora Nacional, which published a broad selection of books in many fields. As his list expanded, so did Monteiro broaden the range of artists whom he commissioned to design book covers. To the list of those to whom he had already given commissions, he added the decorative artist and interior designer John Graz, along with Juvenal Prado and Fernando Correia Dias.

Around 193o, the design and printing of Brazilian books had reached a low ebb with the exception of Monteiro Lobato's Companhia Editora Nacional, which he had founded after the failure of his first publishing enterprise, Companhia Editora Monteiro Lobato. Among the few other publishers who appreciated Monteiro Lobato's commitment to design was José Olympio, whose Livraria José Olympio Editora published a wide range of political and literary works in the 193os and 1940s. The reputation of Olympio's press for handsome books was due to Tomás Santa Rosa (1909–1956). An aspiring artist, Santa Rosa had moved to Rio de Janeiro from the north-east of Brazil and began designing books to earn a living. His first books were for Ariel Editora, which also published a literary review. Two of the books were novels by Jorge Amado, who was also from the north-east. For Amado's novel Cacáu (Cocoa), Santa Rosa created a cover that integrated the bold expressive lettering of the title with a lively illustration and the author's name underneath (Plate 54). He also designed the layout, which revealed his attention to the total integration of typography, margins, line spacing, and the placement of illustrations. While Monteiro Lobato had a sense of the relation between a publication's cover and its interior, Santa Rosa brought a more modern and coherent sensibility to book design. He developed distinctive visual identities for the various Olympio series, which then contributed to the publisher's overall identity. José Olympio published a number of authors who were part of the socially oriented regionalist movement such as

Jorge Amado, José Lins do Rego, Rachel de Queiroz, and Graciliano Ramos, all of whom wrote about the Brazilian north-east. For the cover of Ramos's seminal novel, Vidas Secas (Barren Lives), which chronicled the poverty of north-eastern Brazil, Santa Rosa featured a black and white illustration of a peasant sitting against a stark backdrop with a bare tree and a mountain range. The illustration was placed on a reddish brown surface, perhaps to represent the parched earth. Beneath it was the title in large italic letters. The format was part of a series whose covers featured comparable illustrations with text underneath. Santa Rosa remained with José Olympio until 1954, during which time he produced many memorable book designs both for covers and typographic layouts.

A number of notable book designs, particularly covers, were also created for writers associated with the Brazilian modernist movement, particularly Oswald and Mario de Andrade, the poet Raul Bopp, the critic and essayist Guilherme de Almeida, and Antônio de Alcântara Machado. While visually dramatic, for the most part they lacked the coherence between image, layout, and type that characterized the designs of Santa Rosa. One of the most intriguing of these more experimental books, however, was the cover and layout design that Antônio Paim Viera (dates unconfirmed) did for Antônio de Alcântara Machado's novel Pathé-Baby in 1926, perhaps the most original layout done during the 192os, The title was taken from the name of a small home projector that Pathé Frères first marketed in 1922. It influenced the structure of the book, which was designed to recall the atmosphere of a movie theater. Paim Viera created a fold-out cinematic sequence of drawings that humoristically depicted a musical quartet who disappeared progressively as they accompanied a silent film.

Besides the few publishers in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo who understood the value of well-designed books and covers, there were several in other parts of Brazil who also believed in the value of design. Prominent among them was Livraria do Globo in