shirts and hats, however, the Integralists wore green shirts and peaked caps. Similar to the Nazis, they attacked Marxism and liberalism and some in the movement were also anti-Semitic. In 1938, the year after Vargas attained absolute government power after a coup, he cracked down on the Integralists and the movement disintegrated. While in its active recruiting phase, however, the Integralists distributed posters, some modeled on the famous World War I recruiting posters that foregrounded Lord Kitchener and Uncle Sam. One featured a uniformed Integralist with the movement's flag, most likely modeled on the Nazi flag except that it had the movement's symbol——a sigma instead of a swastika—pointing his finger at the viewer. The slogan at the top read, "Brazil needs you," a paraphrase of "Uncle Sam Wants You," on James Montgomery Flagg's World War I poster.

In 1939 the Vargas regime created its own propaganda agency, the first in Latin America: the Departamento de Imprensa e Propaganda (Department of Press and Propaganda) or DIP, which had been preceded by several other organizations. Headed by Lourival Fontes (1899–1967), the DIP had broad powers of censorship and media control, which it used to promote the vision of a strong cohesive nation under the leadership of Vargas. The regime used various graphic means to this end including posters by Ary Fagundes and other artists. Fagundes, whose work might be considered in relation to modern European and American poster designers like A. M. Cassandre, Joseph Binder, and E. McKnight Kauffer, designed a number of posters for events such as the Brazilian Congress of Urbanism, actions to support Brazil's involvement in World War II, and a call to laborers to participate in the nation's industrialization. Posters were also commissioned by private organizations such as the Centro Carioca, which sponsored an annual Congresso de Brasilidade (Congress of Brazilianness), announcing the event with patriotic propaganda imagery. Propaganda that promoted the regime would prevail until Vargas was overthrown by a military coup in 1945.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

With few exceptions, the literature on product design and graphic design in Latin America is in Spanish or Portuguese. Various volumes of The Cambridge History of Latin America, among other books, provide social, economic, and political background. A few books on industrial development such as Lloyd Hughlett, Industrialization of Latin America; Warren Dean, The Industrialization of São Paulo, 1880-1945; Wilson Suzigan, Indústria Brasileira: Origem e Desenvolvimento; and Sanford Mosk, Industrial Revolution in Mexico also contain some material on the development of products. Maria Cecilia Loschavio dos Santos, Móvel Moderno no Brasil is the rare volume that focuses exclusively on an aspect of Latin American product or furniture design.

There has been extensive writing on aspects of graphic design in Latin America—posters, magazines and book design, and advertising. Helpful books on graphic design include two by Rafael Cardoso Denis on Brazilian design—his edited volume O Design Brasileiro antes do Design. Aspectos da História Gráfica, 1870-1960 and his introductory design history text, Uma Introdução à História do Design. Chico Homem de Melo, Linha do Tempo do Design Gráfico no Brasil is a broad and detailed survey of Brazilian design history. On Cuba, Vicki Gold Levi and Steven Heller, Cuba Style: Graphics from the Golden Age of Design has a lot of useful images with brief introductory texts. There is extensive documentation on graphic design in Mexico during this period. Julieta Ortiz Gaitán, Imágenes del Deseo: Arte y Publicidad en la Prensa Ilustrada Mexicana (1894-1939) is an authoritative account of Mexican advertising, magazine publishing, and illustration from the 189os to World War II and I have relied heavily on it. Cuauhtémoc Medina Diseño antes del Diseño: Diseño Gráfico en México, 1920-196o is the catalog of an exhibition that has an excellent introductory text and many illustrations. I have also profited from two voluminous histories of Mexican graphic design: