presence of the Bauhaus could contribute to his vision of a modern industrial city.

## Rationalization and Renewed Productivity

In 1924, the German economy began to move again, fueled by a huge loan from the United States under the Dawes Plan. That year the Werkbund organized Form ohne Ornament (Form without Ornament), an exhibition featuring unornamented objects that were both machine-made and hand-crafted. Even though not all the objects were made by machine, by emphasizing simple forms as the ideal for production, the exhibition signaled the Werkbund's move away from the Expressionist idealism of the immediate post-war years and marked its support of the more rational aesthetic of Neue Sachlichkeit or New Objectivity. This was the style that characterized progressive art, design, and architecture in the years between the Dawes Plan of 1924 and the stock market crash of 1929. Form ohne Ornament raised again the question of standardized forms for industrial production that had been central to earlier debates but the Werkbund in the 192os was unable to promote quality design to the large companies that produced the bulk of Germany's consumer goods to the same degree that it had before the war.

The AEG, for example, one of Germany's largest manufacturers of electrical products, did not build on the accomplishments of its pre-war design director Peter Behrens. In the 192os, the AEG manufactured many different products from hanging lamps and hair dryers to vacuum cleaners and radios but none achieved the aesthetic distinction their products had before the war. The lack of notable design was also true at Siemens & Halske, which started in the telephone business but later expanded to compete with the AEG in the manufacture of electric appliances for the consumer market. The company established a line called “Protos," which included electric cooking ranges, vacuum cleaners, toasters, electric water heaters, washing machines, and electric irons. Without a design director of Behrens' caliber to give some character to these products, they were straightforward and practical but had no exceptional formal qualities.

One reason why design may not have seemed as important to large German companies in the 192os as it did to the AEG before the war was the interest in Frederick Winslow Taylor's theories of scientific management. Managers in the 192os were more concerned with increasing organizational efficiency at all levels than with addressing the questions of product form that interested the Werkbund. Within the large corporations, support for rationalization methods, which meant efficiency and standardization, spread from the production system to physical distribution and marketing as well. The rationalization movement was led by the Deutscher Normen Ausschuss (German Standards Board), which promoted efficiency methods and standards throughout Germany. The board had been founded in 1916 to standardize the production of military equipment and then continued to establish specifications for parts and procedures that covered all manufacturing sectors. It published a series of industrial standards called Deutsche Industrie Normen (German Industrial Standards) or DIN. These standards had a particular effect on graphic design through the standardized paper sizes that were based on a single unit that could be multiplied to produce sheets of varying dimensions.

## Domestic Goods

As a consequence of the emphasis on scientific management and standardization in large companies, including the AEG and Siemens & Halske, designers made a greater impact on smaller firms, particularly those that produced modern versions of traditional applied arts such as glassware and ceramics. For the Jenaer Glaswerke (Jena Glass Works), Gerhard Marcks (1889-1981), the Form Master in the Bauhaus pottery workshop, and Wilhelm Wagenfeld (1900-199o), a student of Moholy-Nagy's in the metal workshop, designed a glass coffeemaker whose sculpted modern