# Chapter 30: Latin America: Chile, Argentina, Colombia Venezuela, and Uruguay 1900-1939

## Chile

The 2oth century began in Chile with the nation's commitment to parliamentary democracy. It was evident in the formation of new political parties that represented the middle class as well as those formed by working-class activists. In the late 19th century, Chile had developed nitrate mines in the border territory that had once belonged to Peru and Bolivia and the miners there became the bedrock of the country's new working class. The first national labor organization, the Federación Obrera de Chile (Workers' Federation of Chile) (FOCh) was established in 19o9. It was followed by a political party, the Partido Obrero Socialista (Socialist Workers' Party) (POS), founded three years later by a typesetter and political activist Luis Emilio Recabarren (1876–1924). Initially the Socialist Workers' Party aspired to create a single working class that would share equally in the fruits of production. In 1922, it was transformed into the new Chilean Communist Party (CPCh), whose founder was also Recabarren. A new Partido Socialista de Chile (Socialist Party of Chile) was founded in 1933. Whereas the leftists gained considerable strength in the cities, the parties of the right, however, had much greater control of the rural areas.

The Chilean economy was relatively successful in the years preceding World War I. Britain and Germany were both large investors and Chile had developed a national transportation infrastructure, especially to move raw materials from the mines to the ports. Before the war, the country depended heavily on exports,

notably nitrate, and had imported a large portion of its goods for domestic consumption. Similar to other Latin American countries, Chile began to put more emphasis on import substitution when the war ended as relations with its traditional trading partners, Britain and Germany, were disrupted. From the 192os, the United States replaced both of those countries as the major foreign economic presence in Chile.

Until the late 192os, Chile was a parliamentary democracy, although a series of undistinguished presidents did little to improve the conditions of the working and peasant classes. In 1925, the parliament passed a new constitution that embodied a number of important changes including the separation of Church and state and the recognition of workers' right to organize, but in 1927, declining economic conditions enabled a military figure, Carlos Ibáñez, to become president as the result of a rigged election. Sometimes referred to as the Chilean Mussolini, Ibáñez asserted dictatorial powers, exercising repressive measures against union members, journalists, and the left political parties. As an economic policy, he promoted industry and public works, which had a positive effect on the economy for several years until the Great Depression. In mid-1931, Ibáñez fled the country to Argentina as a result of widespread dissatisfaction with his repressive political measures and his inability to resolve the country's severe economic difficulties.

Chile returned to electoral democracy in 1932 when Arturo Alessandri, who had been president in the early 192os, was re-elected. Like Ibáñez before him, he reduced unemployment by promoting industry and government projects but he also neglected the social needs of the working class and threatened the left by forming a sizeable civilian paramilitary force. During Alessandri's regime, the leftist political parties joined together with some moderates to form a Popular Front, which rallied the middle and working classes around the goals of democracy, social welfare, and industrialization. It also adopted a strong oppositional stance against the fascist movements in Europe.