In 1938, the Popular Front was strong enough to elect as president Pedro Aguirre Cerda, a member of the Radical Party, which represented the center rather than the left. Aguirre Cerda continued the emphasis of Ibáñez and Alessandri on industry, but he made a greater commitment to state capitalism when he created the Corporación de Fomento de la Producción (Chilean Economic Development Agency) (CORFO) in 1939. CORFO took an active role in the country's economic development by providing loans and other support to Chilean enterprises. The Popular Front, which included the Communists and Socialists, supported Aguirre Cerda because they recognized the need to strengthen Chile's domestic industries; hence they deferred their original calls for a total revolution and adopted a pragmatic economic position.

There was also good reason for leftists and centrists to unite politically to combat the local fascist movements that sprang up in Chile in the 193os. First among them was the Movimiento Nacional-Socialista de Chile (National Socialist Movement of Chile) (MNS), which was founded in 1932 by the lawyer Jorge González von Marées and the economist Carlos Keller. Known as nacistas, their ideology was drawn from the German Nazi Party as well as the Italian Fascists with some local concerns added. Like their counterparts in Europe, they adopted uniforms and similar tactics of promoting their ideas through street demonstrations and their own publications including the daily newspaper Trabajo (Work). The MNS also had its own flag, which was based on the original Chilean flag and featured a lightning bolt that was positioned diagonally across the stripes. By the late 193os, the militancy of the MNS had softened somewhat as the group's leaders sought to claim a place in the national political debate. In 1938, another group, the Partido Nacional Facista (National Fascist Party) (PNF), which took its name directly from that of the Italian Fascist Party, emerged with a program that rivaled the original one of the MNS with a strong anti-Semitic component added. The PNF too had its own publication, La Patria (The

Fatherland), but the party never gained more than a small number of adherents before it collapsed several years after it started. A third party, the Movimiento Nacional Socialista (National Socialist Movement), emerged in 194o but, like its predecessor the PNF, it did not gain many members nor did it last very long.

New elections were held after the death of Cerda in 1941. His successor was Juan Antonio Ríos, who continued the development of state capitalism through the Chilean Economic Development Agency. This resulted in the establishment of three national companies, the Empresa Nacional de Electricidad (National Power Company) (Endesa) in 1943, the Empresa Nacional de Petróleos (National Oil Company) (ENAP) in 1945, and a year later the Compañía de Aceros del Pacífico (Pacific Steel Company) (CAP), which began operations with the huge Huachipato steelworks adjacent to the port of Talcahuano. Though Rios was not a particularly strong president, his support for the government's involvement with industrial development positioned the Chilean economy after World War II as one of the strongest in Latin America.

## The emergence of private enterprise

A major impetus to industrialization in the late 19th century was the War of the Pacific, which Chile fought between 1879 and 1883 with Peru and Bolivia over the control of territory with rich mineral deposits. Chile was victorious but the cost was large as the government faced the necessity to arm, equip, and support its military forces. This required clothing, footwear, leather goods, pharmaceuticals, guns, cannons, boilers for ships' engines, and other materiel. Foundries and metal workshops were under heavy pressure to fill government orders, which required them to establish efficient production methods. A major producer of weapons was the huge army factory, Fábricas y Maestranzas del Ejército de Chile (Factories and Arsenals of the Chilean Army) (FAMAE), which was established in 1811.

The war may also have stimulated the formation of the Sociedad de Fomento Fabril (Society for

Industrial Promotion) (SFF), an organization of industrialists that was founded in 1883. Among the SFF's early activities were the creation of numerous industrial training schools, the promotion of Chilean participation in international exhibitions, and the advocacy of high import tariffs to prevent foreign competition. In the early 19oos, the SFF opened a special office to foster the immigration of foreign technicians.

To a certain degree, the SFF might be compared to the Deutscher Werkbund, except there were no applied artists involved since the applied arts had not developed in Chile to the degree they had in Germany. In 1904, the SFF sponsored an exhibition of industry and agriculture that featured Chilean goods of high quality in a number of sectors—food and beverages, clothing, knitwear, leather goods, footwear, printing and paper goods, wooden products and furniture, chemical products, and a range of products made in foundries, machine shops, and metalworking establishments. As Henry Kirsch points out, these levels of excellence were achieved despite an insufficient pool of skilled labor and a lack of qualified technical personnel. The promotion of Chilean goods continued during the Centenary of Independence, held in Santiago in 1910, where national industrial and agricultural products were also on display.

Starting in the late 19th century, Chilean manufacturers traveled regularly to Europe and the United States to look for new products that might appeal to the domestic middle-class market, investigate new machinery, and, when possible, bring skilled workers back to Chile. Among the early factories that made consumer products was the Valparaíso metalworking firm V, Momus, Breynat & Cía, founded in 1894, which specialized in household iron goods. In 19o5, the company changed its name to the Fábrica Nacional de Envases y Enlozados (National Factory for Containers and Enamel Ware). Four years later, the management purchased a glazed-ironware factory, which enabled an expansion of the company's product line for industry and the home.

In 1912, Oscar Smits Longton fused several small manufacturers of beds into the Compañía Industrial de Catres (Industrial Bed Company) (CIC). By the end of World War I, the CIC had gained a sizeable share of the furniture market. Capitalizing on its expertise in producing metal furniture, the company broadened its product line by the end of the 193os to include refrigerators, bicycles, and motorbikes. These less expensive domestically-made products can be contrasted with the luxury goods such as silver dinnerware that were imported by Casa Muzard, a French family company that was set up in 1865.

One of the few Latin American countries to produce railroad locomotives, Chile manufactured its first one in 1886 at the state-owned foundry in Santiago. After that, however, private firms made subsequent locomotives. In 1887, the Sociedad Fundición de Chile, the principal private manufacturer of bridges and locomotives, produced Locomotive No. 126, the José Manuel Balmaceda, which was named after the current president. It was said to be the first made in South America by a private company.

Compared to the locomotive factories in Britain or the United States, the number of locomotives produced in Chile was miniscule. Most of those in use were imported from Europe or the United States, but the local manufacture of even a few locomotives was an important contribution to the formation of a Chilean heavy goods industry. Unfortunately, the government did not give the local foundries consistent orders, making it impossible for them to set up regular assembly-line production. Consequently, most foundries that had produced locomotives for the state railroads in the past went out of business.

By 1915, Chile had 7,80o factories, although most were quite small. Nonetheless they produced about 8o percent of domestic consumer needs and this percentage jumped considerably during the next several years. Domestic products ranged from metal goods and furniture to pottery, glass utensils, food and beverages, soap, and tobacco. Many of the entrepreneurs were