immigrants, as no comparable spirit of entrepreneurship existed among the Chilean elite, whose values remained those of a traditional rural society where wealth was generated by the possession of land and the production of agricultural goods. There were, of course, enterprising Chileans such as Carlos Cousiño and Augustín Edwards Mac-Clure whose holdings ranged from newspapers and magazines to breweries, lumber mills, cement factories, and coal mines. The Sociedad de Fomento Fabril also continued its efforts to promote local industry and by 1924 it had councils or affiliates in cities throughout Chile.

Beginning in the 192os, private industrial development on a large scale was led by American companies. Unlike European manufacturers who preferred to sell Chilean customers the patent rights to their manufacturing processes, the American firms established foreign branches of their factories or else built on existing businesses. Among those active in Chile between 1920 and 1932 were the automobile manufacturers Ford and General Motors; the Singer Sewing Machine Company; and RCA Victor, which produced radios and phonographs. These companies had plants to assemble their products, which were made primarily with parts imported from the United States. The factories also produced some parts locally for variants of standard products that would appeal to local consumers. After Ford and General Motors, the most ambitious assembly plant was operated by the airplane manufacturer Curtiss-Wright, which established a branch factory, Fabrica Chilena de Aviones Curtiss-Wright (Chilean Curtiss-Wright Airplane Factory), where workers assembled airplanes but also made some parts. Similar to the factories that produced locomotives in Chile, the Curtiss-Wright factory was one of the few in Latin America where airplanes were made rather than imported.

Although American investment in Chile was welcomed after World War I, there was nonetheless a strain of economic nationalism that resisted domination by outsiders and called for Chile to develop its own industrial potential. This was evident as early as 1912 in the work of historian and political theorist Francisco Antonio Encina (1874-1965), who wrote in his seminal book Nuestra Inferioridad Economica, Sus Causas, Sus Consequencias (Our Economic inferiority, Its Causes, Its Conseguences) of 1912 that if Chile wished to be a modern nation, it would have to develop its own technical skills and entrepreneurial spirit for which it relied on foreigners at the time. Despite the country's steady industrial growth, due largely to mining and small businesses, this lesson was not well learned until the late 193os, when the government embarked on its most ambitious plan ever to stimulate domestic industrial development.

## Government support of industry

In 1887, the Chilean government established a Ministry of Industry and Public Works, an initial step towards greater state involvement in national industrial development. However, the state did not attend significantly to issues of industrialization until the mid-192os when it provided funding to FAMAE, the military arsenal, for the distribution of plows, agricultural equipment, and other goods on the open market in competition with private companies. In 1927, after Carlos Ibáñez became president, the government established a Ministry of Development, which was responsible for industry and public works as well as transportation and agriculture. Within the ministry, special consideration was given to manufacturing through the creation of the Dirección General de Industrias Fabriles (General Directorate of Manufacturing Industries). To favor domestic products, Ibáñez also worked closely, especially on tariff issues, with the Society for Industrial Promotion, which gained considerable power during his tenure.

To promote Chilean industry abroad, the Ibáñez regime commissioned a pavilion for the 1929 Ibero-American Exposition in Seville, Spain. Designed by the architect José Martinez (dates unconfirmed), it was a conservative three-storey building in a Neo-Colonial style that emphasized Chile's local architectural