could the ornamental designs. Once students began to graduate from the School of Applied Arts in the 193os, a few received commissions for more modern covers with illustrations and contemporary Deco lettering.

In the mid-193os, the painter and graphic artist Gustavo Carrasco (1907-1999), who had studied at the School of Fine Arts in Santiago with the Russian émigré artist Boris Grigoriev (1886–1939), and also took courses at the School of Applied Arts in Berlin, began to work for Editorial Zig-Zag and in 1937 he designed a series of attractive covers for their Library of Chilean Writers. In 194o, Editorial Zig-Zag hired as its art director Mauricio Amster, a Pole who had emigrated to Spain in 1930 and then to Chile in 1939. Amster had already gained a considerable reputation as a book designer in Spain, where he also created posters for the anti-fascist movement (see Chapter 24). At Editorial Zig-Zag, Amster worked with illustrators like Coré and sometimes designed as many as three or four books a day. He was also a co-founder of a small press, Editorial Cruz del Sur, which published a number of books by prominent Chilean authors. In 1944, he was a founder of the cultural review Babel, which he also designed.

## Advertising, logotypes, posters

By 19oo, Chile had a developed advertising culture, due to a thriving domestic consumer market. The first advertising agency, La Sudamérica, opened in 19o6. It offered a number of services including placing ads in newspapers and magazines, painting large lettered signs, and distributing small notices in public places. In 1928, Carlos Bofill (1887-d.o.d. unconfirmed) opened an advertising office that functioned like a modern publicity agency. At first he concentrated on calendars and outdoor advertising, though he also sought to provide integrated services for his clients. Among the difficulties he faced was finding commercial artists who could do original drawings rather than copy ads from foreign magazines. It was also hard to find professional layout artists as well as an adequate selection of typefaces. In 1935, Bofill merged his office with that of Arturo Edwards to form Bofill, Edwards y Cía. Before the merger, Edwards had worked extensively with Argentine commercial artists to create campaigns whose drawings were central in calling attention to the products. Competitors of Bofill, Edwards included Propaganda Fonck, founded in 1931 by a German immigrant, Oscar Fonck, and two companies established in 1936, the agency of Pablo Petrowitsch, who also worked with Argentine professionals, and Lucho Arón Publicidad. Early advertisements that were inserted in newspapers and magazines usually included a small black and white drawing accompanied by extensive copy.

Prominent artists for advertising campaigns were often the well-known illustrators and caricaturists who worked for the mass magazines. Among them was Moustache, who was responsible for numerous campaigns, notably one for Tisphorine, a tonic that suppressed the appetite. Magazine ads before World War I were often in color and frequently featured elaborate lettering with illustrations and occasional Art Nouveau ornaments added. As photography became more popular, it replaced illustrations, although hand lettering and decorative borders were often combined with photographic images. After 192o, when the United States became Chile's major economic partner, American popular magazines arrived in abundance and local artists and advertisers could see the sophisticated color ads with their "reason why" copy. However, American advertising was only one influence in the post-war years. French and Italian posters and illustration were also important sources; in fact Chilean illustrators and commercial artists had a long tradition of looking to France rather than the United States for images of modernity.

Trademarks also became popular in the 192os and 193os and a number of marks were created that have endured for years. Similar to French designer Charles Loupot's two waiters who serve as the trademark for St. Raphael Quinine, the trademark for Viña Santa Carolina (Santa Carolina Vineyard)—a waiter striding

Latin America: Chile, Argentina, Colombia, Venezuela, and Uruguay 1900–1939

forward with a bottle of wine on a tray in one hand and a tray with three glasses in the other—is attributed to the cartoonist Edmundo Searle. Other durable marks include the Dutch girl who personified Klenzo detergent—a reminder of the American Dutch Maid mark, Los Andes matches, and the lettering for Gath y Chaves, the exclusive department store with a large advertising budget.

From the 193os, advertising created abroad for American products was widespread and competed with locally produced advertising. As in Cuba, where American products dominated the economy, American product ads were mostly created by advertising agencies in New York and introduced in Latin America with Spanish texts.

Though newspaper and magazine advertising was extensive, given the large number of daily, weekly, and monthly publications, posters remained a popular publicity medium. They were central to the intense competition between two tea companies, Té Ratampuro and Té Demonio, around 19o6. Luis Fernando Rojas designed lithographic posters for both companies. His poster for Té Ratampuro was typical of late 19th-century advertising in Europe and the United States. It featured an image that had nothing to do with the product, in this case a clown holding a teapot and a box of tea, flanked by two dancing girls. The lettering consisted mainly of three-dimensional forms that comprised a trite slogan, "Ratampuro is the better tea” (Plate 56).

At the beginning of the century, the Imprenta Barcelona held a series of poster competitions that brought to public attention the highly developed European graphic styles, notably Art Nouveau, that impressed Chilean artists at the time. When the magazine Zig-Zag was launched in 1905, the principal medium to disseminate news of its publication was the poster. The one chosen to promote the journal was simply an enlarged version of the aforementioned cover by Paul Dufresne. The publisher had 1oo,00o copies printed in New York and then distributed them throughout Chile. Even after the magazine was sold in 1919, the new publisher Gustavo Helfmann continued to promote special issues with posters.

A significant date for the development of the poster in Chile is 1916, when the artist Otto Georgi (1890-1969), a former painting student at the School of Fine Arts in Santiago, won first prize in a poster competition sponsored by the Federation of Students, a university group. The poster commemorated an annual event known as the Spring Festival or Day of the Students. Georgi portrayed three figures, a clown and two masked women, set against a background of revelry. The flatness of the composition and the stylized figures distinguish the design from the earlier posters of Fauré and Rojas, which continued the 19th-century realist tradition.

For the next three years, the students' poster competition was won by another artist, Isaías Cabezón (1891-1963), who, like Georgi, had studied painting at the School of Fine Arts. There are vague references in Cabezón's posters to the carefree gestures of Jules Chéret's Belle Epoque figures, although Cabezón's energetic dancers display a wild energy that is lacking in the Chéret's posters.

With money gained from the poster competitions, Cabezón traveled in Europe, where he studied painting in Paris, participated in several salons, and became acquainted with modern tendencies in European art including Fauvism and Expressionism. When he returned to Santiago, he joined the Montparnasse Group, continued painting, and worked as a set designer and illustrator. Early in 1928, Carlos Isamitt, director of the School of Fine Arts, invited him to head a studio for decorative composition and poster design, the first of its kind in Chile. There Cabezón developed a series of exercises that engaged his students with studies of color, composition, and lettering that derived from European modern art. The studio was short-lived, however, since the Ministry of Education closed the School of Fine Arts that year.

As a consequence, Cabezón received funding to supervise the studies of a group of students, known as the "Generation of 28," who were sent to Europe for five years to further their studies of the fine and applied arts so they could return to create an improved arts curriculum in Chile. He was joined in his supervisory duties by the painter Camilo Mori (1896–1973), a founding member of the Grupo Montparnasse, who had recently been named director of the National Museum of Fine Arts.

In the early 193os, the School of Applied Arts at the University of Chile introduced a new course in poster design, headed by the painter Ana Cortés (1895-1998), the first woman to teach in a Chilean school of art or applied arts. In 1925, Cortés had gone to Paris, where she studied with the Cubist artist André Lhote. She became a strong advocate for modern art when she returned to Chile in 1928. In her course, Cortés introduced a methodology that emphasized the basic elements of composition and the fact that a poster was first and foremost a design and not an illustration. As a professor of drawing in the university's School of Architecture, Camilo Mori was also a strong influence on students interested in poster design.

A number of students who graduated from the School of Applied Arts became leading poster designers during the 193os, a time when the poster flourished in Chile. These graduates included Arturo Adriazola (dates unconfirmed), Luis Troncoso (dates unconfirmed), Fernando Ibarra (dates unconfirmed), Nicolas Martínez (dates unconfirmed), Santiago Nattino (1921-1985), Lupercio Arancibia (dates unconfirmed), Héctor Cáceres (dates unconfirmed), and Luis Oviedo (dates unconfirmed). Besides them, Mori was extremely active, perhaps the most active, as a poster designer in the 193os and early 194os. For the most part, Mori's posters were conceptual rather than illustrative, but not all clients were comfortable leaving illustration behind. Mori tried to find a balance in a series of posters he created for the magazine Zig-Zag to announce a number of special issues. Other posters he designed for cultural or political events usually featured a strong graphic image that conveyed the message. Although there was an impetus among Chilean poster designers to distance themselves from the influence of Cassandre, Loupot, and Carlu in France, Mori's posters had a directness that was comparable to Cassandre's. This was evident in his poster for an exhibition of Chilean contemporary art, which featured a palette with colors on it, arranged to signify the Chilean flag. Mori was a highly sought after poster designer, whose clients ranged from government agencies and commercial enterprises to theaters and museums, publishers, and political parties.

The poster culture in Chile was enhanced in the late 193os by the arrival of several émigré designers from Europe, notably Kitty Goldmann (dates unconfirmed) from Austria, and Francisco Otta (1908-1999) from Czechoslovakia. Both contributed to the creation of a modern style. Goldmann was from a comfortable Viennese family that moved in that city's intellectual and artistic circles. She arrived in Chile around 1939 and worked for a variety of clients, doing posters for government and political events as well as commercial concerns. Francisco Otta, who reached Chile in 1940, had a broad background in linguistics, law, art history, and painting. Like Goldmann, he designed posters for numerous organizations and causes. A major commercial client was Shell Oil, for whom he did a series of posters that featured stylized automobiles and other images combined with simple copy lines.

The burgeoning of the poster movement in the late 193os was supported by commissions from a number of civic organizations and causes as well as municipalities and the federal government, which had a strong involvement with the economy and numerous social programs. The government commissioned posters for the national census, a literacy campaign, rail travel, and tourism, while the city of Santiago relied on the poster to announce its 4th Centenary, art museums publicized exhibitions, political groups urged solidarity with occupied countries in Europe, and companies like Shell and Bayer and the Chilean Steamship Line