advertised their products and services. Chile's nitrate producers had a long tradition of promoting their product through various publicity materials and over time commissioned a number of posters for this purpose.

Motivated perhaps by the strong labor organization in the printing trades, a group of poster designers decided in 1942 to form the Unión Cartelistas de Chile (Chilean Poster Designers' Union). Its president was Camilo Mori, a political activist with a left-wing orientation, and its members included most of the prominent Chilean poster designers as well as several of the émigré artists. The group planned to hold annual salons, publish a technical bulletin, and mount a large retrospective of Chilean posters. While none of these events came to pass, the group did organize an exhibit of contemporary posters in 1944.

## Graphics on the left

Graphics of the political left in Chile from the turn of the century to the end of the 193os followed conventional 19th-century forms, notably publications to inform and persuade and propaganda for social causes. Numerous publications——newsletters, bulletins, and journals—were designed for workers in the typographic industry such as the members of the Sociedad Unión de los Tipografos (Typographers' Union Society), who had their own bulletin with an illustrated cover. After World War II, the émigré book designer Mauricio Amster created a strong cover for the bulletin that featured a griffin outlined in black with bold red letters underneath. The leftist political groups, notably the Socialist Party, the Socialist Workers' Party, the Federation of Socialist Youth, and the Communist Party of Chile also had their own publications including El Socialista (The Socialist), Consigna (Order), Rumbos (Directions), Barricada (Barricade), El Despertar del Pueblo (The People Wake Up), El Siglo (The Century), and Bandera Roja (Red Flag).

Posters played an important role among the left. Most of the artists who created posters for the Socialist or Communist Party were graduates of the School of Applied Arts, where Eduardo Castillo Espinoza has described the atmosphere as being extremely open politically. The school was hospitable to students from working-class backgrounds and many studied in its evening classes as well as its daytime programs.

Fernando Marcos (dates unconfirmed), a graduate of the school, was an active designer for the Federation of Socialist Youth. He worked on the youth federation's magazine Rumbos, where he collaborated with the artist Mario Corvalán (dates unconfirmed), who signed his design work KOR. Marcos also designed posters for the youth federation, drawing his visual references from the posters of the Russian Revolution as well as the graphics that followed the revolution in Mexico. Posters of the Spanish Civil War were also an influence on Marcos, as they were on other designers on the left. Marcos's poster for a conference of socialist youth shows three militant figures—two men and a woman—marching forward Soviet-style. A factory in the background represents industrial production and the youth federation's flag with its red star logo serves as a background for the marching youth (Fig. 30.04). As well, Marcos designed a poster for the Socialist Party that promoted land reform, presenting an imposing peasant holding a strip of land with a small house and furrowed field on it.

Poster designers who were members of the Communist Party included Camilo Mori, Carlos Sagredo (dates unconfirmed), Santiago Nattino, and Luis Oviedo. Compared to Marcos's adoption of militant imagery that recalled the Russian Revolution or the Spanish Civil War, Mori remained committed to a modernist European style that was conceptual rather than tendentious. For a 194o poster that announced the relaunch of the Communist Party's newspaper El Siglo, he chose a profiled head and an open hand to represent a statement being shouted out and he juxtaposed these with a page that bore the masthead of the newspaper. Mori linked the new publication to the national interest by distributing the parts of the Chilean flag among the