Furniture design was also central to the low-cost housing that the Hogar Obrero Cooperativa (Workers' Housing Cooperative) built. The cooperative, which was founded in 19o5 by members of the Argentine Socialist Party including Juan B. Justo (1865-1928) and Nicolás Repetto (1871-1965), built thousands of low-cost homes for working-class consumers. As part of a continuous process of design improvement, the cooperative held an exhibition dedicated to the ideal home in Buenos Aires in 1934. Among the topics that were examined was the rational use of furniture.

Besides building homes, the Hogar Obrero Cooperativa created a network of cooperative supermarkets throughout Argentina called Supercoops. The cooperative's broad approach to housing and workingclass needs bears some similarity to the program of the Neue Frankfurt in Germany, the difference being that the Neue Frankfurt was confined to housing developments in a single city and served far fewer people than the Hogar Obrero Cooperativa.

As the Argentine government became more repressive during the 193os, the Hogar Obrero Cooperativa, with its emphasis on class solidarity and cooperative living, was one form of resistance to the dictatorship of General Justo and those who followed him. Under Justo, the government also began the planning and design of the Argentine Pavilion for the 1939 World's Fair in New York, which was designed jointly by Armando d'Ans (dates unconfirmed) and the American architect Aymar Embury (188o-1966). Intended to convey the image of a modern industrial nation, the pavilion featured four monumental pylons in front, along with sizeable illuminated letters that spelled out "Argentina." The walls of the large entrance hall were composed of glass showcases that featured major products along with dioramas of Argentine life. In the pavilion's theater, films were shown that presented examples of Argentine scenery and industrial activity. With less emphasis on the past and more on the country's present and future, the pavilion and exhibition design successfully positioned Argentina as an industrial leader among the Latin American nations, a fact that was corroborated by the steady pace of industrialization the country maintained during the 1920s and 1930s.

## Commercial art, advertising, and publishing

## Illustrated magazines and newspapers

Though Buenos Aires has a long history as a provincial city, it only became the capital of Argentina in 188o, a factor that stimulated the city's cultural life. The first illustrated magazine to be published in the new capital was Don Quijote, which appeared in 1884 and continued until 1905. Drawing on the rich heritage of French political satire and caricature as well as the humorous writing and illustrations of Britain's Punch, Don Quijote and the illustrated magazines that followed it nonetheless created their own tradition of political and cultural journalism.

The magazine-that set the strongest precedent for other Argentine illustrated magazines was Caras y Caretas (Faces and Masks), which first appeared in Montevideo, Uruguay, in 189o. It was founded by a Spaniard, Eustaquio Pellicer (1859-1937), who relaunched the magazine as a weekly in Buenos Aires in 1898 along with a fellow Spaniard, the artist Manuel Mayol (1865–1929), who had earlier published drawings in Don Quijote under the pseudonym Heraclitus and who played a strong role in developing the magazine's artistic side.

Caras y Caretas built a sizeable audience with its broad coverage of art, literature, and current events. It was heavily illustrated and successfully combined humor with serious journalism. The art directors of Caras y Caretas and other illustrated magazines selected the artists to illustrate the covers, articles, and stories and supervised the layouts of the spreads and the design of the lettering. Among them was Eduardo Álvarez (1892-1967), a painter, caricaturist, and illustrator who had also worked for the magazine as a retoucher, layout artist, and letterer. Included among the weekly's comic illustrations were the forerunners of Argentina's historietas or comic strips. The first historieta to be published in Caras y Caretas was Viruta y Chicharrón, which originally appeared in 1912.

The multicolored covers featured humorous drawings or caricatures, while the layouts varied greatly from full-page comic drawings to more somber illustrations of articles and fiction. The drawing quality ranged widely from sophisticated to somewhat awkward, as did the layouts, which sometimes mimicked Art Nouveau lettering and had borders that consisted of whiplash lines. Some artists employed a drawing style adopted from Art Nouveau, which was known in Buenos Aires as arte moderno or modern art.

During the years of its publication between 1898 and 194I, Caras y Caretas attracted many outstanding caricaturists, artists, illustrators, and journalists from Argentina as well as other countries including Spain, Italy, Uruguay, Bolivia, and Peru. These included the Uruguayan artists Aurelio Giménez (1877–191o), who was also a co-founder of another weekly, La Vida Moderna (Modern Life); Alejandro Roux (1902-1960), a prolific artist who worked for numerous magazines besides Caras y Caretas; and the Peruvian artist and caricaturist Julio Málaga Grenet (1886-1963), who later became art director of the newspaper La Nación and is considered to be of one of Argentina's first advertising artists. Among the most prominent of the Caras y Caretas artists was José María Cao (1862–1918), who arrived in Buenos Aires as a young man from Galicia in north-east Spain. Cao specialized in political caricature and early in his career he was briefly jailed for one of his drawings of a leading Argentine political figure.

Besides Cao, another Spanish artist, Alejandro Sirio (1890-1953), got a start with Caras y Caretas. Though capable of comic drawings and caricature, Sirio aspired to a more delicate and refined technique, which he developed through black and white line drawings that combined a graceful linear style with intricate textures and occasional strong contrasts with black massed areas. Sirio was perhaps Argentina's first all-round commercial artist who could draw for the weekly magazines and daily newspapers, create film posters, or illustrate books. For the magazines, he contributed besides illustrations small ornate vignettes and calligraphic lettering in a variety of decorative styles. His most memorable work is the series of dense dramatic illustrations he drew for Enrique Laretta's historic novel La Gloria de Don Ramiro of 19o8 (Fig. 30.o6). It would not be difficult to think of Sirio as an Argentine Aubrey Beardsley but besides his debt to the English artist he drew from many other sources to finally forge a style of his own.

The large community of caricaturists, illustrators, and commercial artists as well as popular authors and journalists resident in Buenos Aires from the late 189os on made possible a spate of other weekly and monthly magazines as well as newspapers that both complemented and competed with Caras y Caretas. In 1915, Caras y Caretas inaugurated a monthly magazine called Plus Ultra, which had high graphic standards and was directed particularly to the Spanish immigrant community. A direct competitor with Caras y Caretas was Fray Mocho, which adopted as its title the nickname of Caras y Caretas's first editor.

Just a few years after Caras y Caretas started, an Englishman, Don Alberto Haynes, inaugurated a magazine for families, which he called El Hogar (The Home). Compared to Caras y Caretas, it became a general interest magazine for an audience less attuned to political satire, although Haynes hired many of the artists who worked for Caras y Caretas to illustrate articles in El Hogar. One of his principal collaborators was Alejandro Sirio. Haynes began to build a publishing empire with other illustrated magazines, notably El Mundo Argentino (Argentine World), and more specialized publications such as Mundo Deportivo (Sports World), Mundo Agrario (Agrarian World), and Mundo Infantil (Children's World). The newspaper Haynes founded, El Mundo, competed with Buenos Aires' two oldest papers, La Prensa (The Press) and La Nación (The Nation), which owned both