remained there until 1932. He established a studio, Editorial Affiches Mauzan, where he was joined for a short period by the Italian poster artist Gino Boccasile (1901-1952), a former student of his who had worked in his studio in Milan. Boccasile was a supporter of Mussolini and was known in Italy for his posters of handsome men and women enjoying various contemporary products.

Mauzan quickly developed a clientele that included a number of international and Argentine companies such as Bayer Aspirin, Crosley radios, Craven cigarettes, Carpano vermouth, Hupmobile, Geniol pain relievers, and Alpargatas sandals (Plate 57). For Geniol, Mauzan created variations on the theme of the product's capacity for pain reduction. Not only did he design a humorous poster that showed a smiling man withstanding the pain of nails and pins stuck in his head, but he also devised a similar three-dimensional figure for pharmacies and other shops where Geniol was sold. Due to Mauzan, Geniol's advertising became extremely popular.

The posters Mauzan created introduced an entirely new visual vocabulary to Argentine clients. First was the rich variegated color that resulted from masterful lithographic printing. Second was the beautifully drawn lettering that was unique for each client. Third was Mauzan's ability to switch from whimsy to deeper emotional imagery, depending on the job. Fourth was his understanding of how to generate customer surprise by creating posters with variations that would be released sequentially. Fifth and last was his superb draftsmanship and integration of lettering and images. Mauzan's posters were also displayed elsewhere in Latin America including Brazil, where some were printed with Portuguese texts.

Posters, along with filmcards, were used as well to advertise Argentine films, but none evinced the visual sophistication and quality of Mauzan's product advertising. The first films by the Lumière brothers were shown in Buenos Aires in 1896 shortly after they were previewed in Paris, and Argentina produced its first silent film, a brief documentary, in 1899. One of the early film producers was Max Glücksmann, who promoted his films heavily with posters and newspaper advertisements. For the most part, the early posters were undistinguished, consisting mainly of one or more photographs of the film's stars framed by black linear borders and accompanied by the film's title in large letters and other information in smaller type. In later years, there was more variety in the posters, whose techniques ranged from cartoon drawings to photomontage, but no major poster artists emerged in this genre.

## The design of books

By 1936, Argentina had become the largest publisher of Spanish-language books anywhere. A considerable number of intellectuals, artists, and even printers had emigrated to Argentina from Europe and elsewhere in Latin America. Numerous Spaniards came to escape the oppressive regime of General Francisco Franco that had resulted from the Spanish Civil War. Most immigrants settled in Buenos Aires, which had the country's greatest concentration of printing establishments as well as binderies, paper suppliers, and all the other services that a publishing enterprise required. Many of those who arrived were well educated and joined an Argentine middle class that supported the sale of books, magazines, and newspapers.

With the Spanish émigrés came many new ideas about socialism, anarchism, and the visual heritage of the avant-garde movements such as Constructivism. The majority of the print shop workers were anarchists and most participated in different anarchist unions.

One of the first literary magazines in Argentina was Nosotros (Us), published between 1907 and 1943, which represented the literary tendencies of the time but had become by the 192os the publication that vanguard writers like Jorge Luis Borges would react against. Borges was part of the Florida group of writers who experimented with avant-garde techniques. They were associated with the journal Martín Fierro,