to the entrepreneur-inventors of the early Industrial Revolution in Europe.

Coltejer, a textile factory, inaugurated in Medellín in 1907, was among a number of enterprises that developed in the period between 1902 and 1909, supported by President Reyes, who established a system of high tariffs to protect the local industries from foreign imports. Others industries included the Bello Textile Factory and Olano Fósforos, a factory that produced matches. What made these factories possible, however, was the introduction of electricity, which was essential for their machinery. Besides all the imported machines, there were occasional local inventions such as one by an engineer from Antioquia that separated the fibers of sisal, a local plant.

## The centenary of Independence 1910

To commemorate Colombia's independence from Spain and to promote a vision of the country as a modern industrializing nation, President Reyes established a committee in 1907 to organize a centenary celebration, which would be joined by an exhibition dedicated to industry and agriculture. Expositions of this type were inaugurated in the 19th century, as exemplified by the Exposición Agroindustrial, which opened in the harbor city of Baranquilla in 1871. Precedents for such exhibitions elsewhere in Latin America included fairs held in Mexico in 19oo and Brazil in 1908.

After Reyes was deposed in 1909, the efforts to organize the centenary exhibition were sustained by the next president, Ramón González Valencia. The committee's intent was to celebrate the national past as well as to make visible more recent accomplishments in agriculture and industry. To achieve this latter aim, the committee members settled on a group of pavilions dedicated to the industrial and agricultural development of the country's different regions as well as several pavilions to promote Colombia's progress as an emerging civilized nation. It was also President González's hope that the centenary would create an atmosphere of peace after the destruction of the Thousand Days War.

Two pavilions were built for the Exposition of Industry and Agriculture—one dedicated to industrial products and the other to machines. The latter was no doubt modeled on Dutert's and Contamin's Galerie des Machines at the Paris exhibition of 1889. The industrial pavilion, whose principal architect was Mariano Sanz de Sanatmaría (1857-1915), designer of the Municipal Theater, an eclectic pastiche of European compositional elements, which was typical of Colombian architecture of this period. Its references looked back to Art Nouveau rather than forward to the modern age.

The two pavilions displayed a miscellaneous array of products. Among them, textiles held a prominent place and examples of woven cloth, upholstery, and various fabrics were shown. The different galleries also housed glass, electric clocks, coffee grinders, horseshoes, cosmetics, fertilizer, polishers, machines for making noodles, an numerous other products whose aggregate display was intended to impress viewers by its sheer volume.

## Further industrialization

The number of factories continued to grow in the years following the 191o exhibitions. The majority were textile factories, though one of the most mechanized was the Compañía Colombiana de Tabaco (Colombian Tobacco Company) in Medellín. Nonetheless, industrialization was spotty and was concentrated mainly in the largest cities, notably Bogotá and Medellín. As the number of factories increased, the artisan class declined and was replaced by factory workers. Industrialists took a particular interest in American and French writings that promoted efficiency such as Frederick Winslow Taylor's Principles of Scientific Management and Henri Fayol's work on industrial administration.

Industrialization was particularly intense during the period 1925-1930, when Colombia and other Latin American countries had great difficulties bringing in goods from abroad and had to adopt