import substitution. The intensity was due in part to a new generation of entrepreneurs such as Jorge Echavarría and Pedro Nel Ospina, both from the province of Antioquia. They realized that the most advanced techniques of production were required if Colombian industry was to compete successfully with products made in Europe and the United States.

As previously mentioned, Medellín and the province of Antioquia generally were two of Colombia's principal industrial centers. Among the enterprises that were established there in the 192os were companies that made beer, cement, textiles, and cigarettes. During the 193os, these industries continued to grow, and as a consequence of their success, the number of artisans declined drastically. As in other Latin American countries, Colombia was most successful in the production of consumables such as foodstuffs, beer, and cigarettes. The textile industry remained relatively strong, though it introduced fewer innovations than its competition abroad. Industrial engineers were highly regarded by the major industries and their knowledge of manufacturing efficiency and how production lines could be organized contributed to the success of numerous firms in Colombia.

## The training of artisans

As early as the 187os, there was an official movement to create a system of technical education in Colombia. A number of Escuelas de Artes y Oficios (Schools of Arts and Trades) were established, but given the lack of industrial development at the time, these schools oscillated between teaching traditional crafts such as ironwork, carpentry, and tailoring and more modern trades like mechanics, construction, ironwork, and pottery. Artistic crafts such as jewelry making, silverwork, leatherwork, and woodcarving were also added to the curricula in some schools.

Then, in 1904, President Reyes established in Bogotá the Escuela Profesional de Artes Decorativas e Industriales (Professional School of Decorative and Industrial Arts), whose curriculum was organized along the traditional lines of European decorative arts schools. Courses were offered in silverwork, ceramics, metalwork, woodcarving, and stonecutting. The school's founder and first director was the painter Andrés de Santa Maria (1860–1945), who had studied art for many years in France, where he was strongly influenced by the Impressionists. Santa Maria continued as director of the school until 1911 when he returned to Europe for good. Special schools were also established to prepare women for work in the home.

## Graphic design

Most of the early graphic designers, advertising artists, caricaturists, and illustrators in Colombia were originally trained as painters. A number studied at the Institute of Fine Arts in Medellín, which was founded in 1910. They included Ricardo Rendón (1894-1931), Pepe Mexía (1895-1978), José Posada Echeverri (1906– 1952) and Eladio Vélez (1897–1967). Rendón and Mexía were among the founders of Los Panidas, a group, named after the god Pan, which embraced the latest ideas in art, literature, and philosophy. The group was short-lived, reaching its apogee in 1915 with the publication of the Revista las Panidas (Las Panidas Review), but it nonetheless strongly influenced the development of new tendencies in Colombian art and literature. Other commercial artists studied at the School of Fine Arts in Bogotá, which opened its doors in 1886.

In 191o, El Grafico (The Graphic) was founded in Bogotá as a weekly publication. Among its aims was to promote the use of advertising. Early advertisements were published in the metropolitan newspapers, especially El Tiempo, a Bogotá paper that first began publication in 19ı. Ads also appeared in an early illustrated magazine, Cromos, which was founded in 1916. For its covers, the editors of Cromos normally reproduced paintings by Colombian and European artists, the first ones being done by Coriolano Leudo (1866–1957), a prominent Bogotá painter who was one of the first professors at the Bogotá School of Fine Arts. Leudo was also an illustrator whose projects included the illustrations for a widely used government textbook that denounced alcohol consumption. The Italian artist Rinaldo Scandroglio (dates unconfirmed), who arrived in Bogotá from Italy in 1926, created a large number of illustrations for Cromos, many drawing on Cubist and Futurist precedents.

Advertisements became more artistic in the 192os, as did the logos and packaging for Colombian enterprises. This was a period that saw the first advertising agencies in Colombia. Among the leading advertising artists were Ricardo Rendón and Pepe Mexía, both of whom had moved to Bogotá from Medellín by this time. In 1924, the cigarette company Coltabaco in that city, previously known as the Compañía Colombiana de Tabaco, created an advertising department, which was directed by the painter, illustrator, and caricaturist José Posada Echeverri was appointed art director. He remained in that position for more than 40 years, while also producing illustrations for many publications such as El Grafico, Claridad (Clarity), Cromos, El Bodegón (The Still Life), and Pan. Posada Echevarri worked in the style of Erté, Georges Lepape, and others who drew for the French fashion magazines, though he sometimes added a mystical element to his drawings that was reminiscent of Symbolism and Art Nouveau.

In 1925, Coltabaco hired Ricardo Rendón to design the package for a new cigarette brand, Pielroja (Redskin). Rendón drew the profile of an American Indian wearing a war bonnet, an image that was also widely used for other product brands, particularly in the United States. More important than Rendón's work as an advertising artist, however, was his career as Colombia's most trenchant political caricaturist during the 192os, a period when he chronicled the political and social life of the country.

Also in 1925, another Medellín company, Postobón, which made soft drinks, hired Pepe Mexía to create advertisements for a new product, Freskola. Mexía created a whimsical ad that featured two men, both represented by line drawings, seated at café tables on one of which were four bottles of the new beverage.

Joined to the ad was a comic copy line that touted Freskola as a refreshing drink to imbibe after the excesses of alcohol.

According to art historian Álvaro Medina, the work of Mexía presented a new modern style while Ricardo Rendón prolonged a traditional technique of illustration. Mexía's Freskola ad is consequently something of a landmark in early Colombian advertising, not to be equaled even by the ads of the 193os including those that adopted Art Deco lettering and occasional abstract ornamentation. A number of these were featured in Pan, a cultural magazine that began publication in 1935.

During the 193os, other companies such as the textile firm Coltejer, the beer company Bavaria, and the Companía Nacional de Chocolates followed the lead of Coltabaco by hiring artists to design logotypes and other corporate advertising. Some companies started their own art departments. Among the artists who worked on corporate commissions besides José Posada Echeverri, Ricardo Rendón, and Pepe Mexía were the Medellín painters Luis Eduardo Vieco (1882–1955) and Humberto Chávez (1891–1971).

The poster as an advertising medium was not well developed in Colombia during the years between the Thousand Days War and World War II. However, in 1938, Colombia hosted the first edition of the Juegos Deportivos Bolivarianos (Bolivarian Games), a regional sporting event for the countries in the northern part of South America but including Panama as well. The games also coincided with the 4ooth anniversary of the founding of Bogotá.

The artist chosen to do a series of posters that simultaneously commemorated the games and the founding of Bogotá was Sergio Trujilio Magnenat (1911-1999), a former painting student at the School of Fine Arts in Bogotá and later director of the decorative arts curriculum at the school. Trujillo Magnenat's series of posters depicted muscular male and female athletes actively engaged in various sporting events. Their stylistic references ranged from Ludwig Hohlwein