to French fashion illustration. They were distinctive, however, for the strength of their painting style and their attempt to integrate the images of the athletes with bold lettering that announced both the games and the Bogotá anniversary.

Trujillo Magnenat was Bogotá's leading graphic designer, not only because of the variety of illustrative and lettering styles he employed but also due to the range of projects in which he was engaged. Beginning in 1931, he was an illustrator for the Sunday supplement of El Tiempo, and was also art director of a cultural magazine Revista de las Indias, which the Ministry of Education published between 1936 and 1938. For this publication, he designed a sober typographic cover as well as the interior pages, particularly those that featured poetry. Trujillo Magnenat took an especially strong interest in modern lettering, which he featured prominently in his layouts. He was as well the art director, illustrator, and designer of a children's magazine, Rin Rin, which was also published by the Ministry of Education. Like Revista de las Indias, it was short-lived, appearing between 1936 and 1938, but Álvaro Medina considers it to have been the best children's magazine of the period.

Another prominent art director and illustrator was Santiago Martínez Delgado (1906–1954), who was also known for his watercolors, paintings, and woodcarvings. Martínez Delgado was that rare Latin American artist who studied in the United States rather than Europe. He attended the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts and was a student of Frank Lloyd Wright at Taliesin. In Chicago, he created illustrations for Esquire magazine and worked in the Federal Art Project. The latter experience prepared him to become a prominent muralist in the 194os after he returned to Colombia.

Martínez Delgado had contributed illustrations to El Grafico before he left for Chicago and following his return he became the art director of Vida (Life), a cultural publication of the Compañía Colombiana de Seguros (Colombian Insurance Company). As Alvaro Medina notes, Martínez Delgado's drawing style was eclectic. He was a master of the fine line, but his illustrations for Vida varied from highly decorative images to more contemporary drawings inspired by Art Deco.

While many magazines in Colombia continued to feature illustration, Estampa specialized in photography. Among the photographers who did reportage for the weekly publication was Gonzalo Ariza (1912–1995), a man better known as a painter but whose carefully composed photographs embodied the tenets of the German New Photography. Sergio Trujillo Magnenat, who was recognized for his photographs as well as his painting, illustration, and graphic design, contributed layouts to the magazine.

Ariza and Trujillo Magnenat worked for Estampa during the 193os, a period that witnessed a return to liberal politics after a long period of conservatism. The decade also saw an improvement in the design of book covers. Among the leading cover designers were Adolfo Samper (1905–1991), a contributor to El Grafico, Cromo, and other publications; Alberto Arango Uribe (1897-1941), who became Bogotá's leading political caricaturist after the untimely death of Ricardo Rendón in 1931; and Pepe Gómez (1892-1936), former art director of the weekly illustrated magazine Bogotá Cómico (Comic Bogota) and its successor, Semana Cómica (Comic Week). All had versatile careers that included caricature and illustration.

## Venezuela

## Political and economic development

For much of the 19th century, Venezuela was ruled by caudillos or military strongmen. This was extended into the 2oth century when General Cipriano Castro brought his provincial army from the Andean state of Táchira to Caracas and took over the government in 1899. Castro thus established a stronghold for other caudillos from Táchira, who ruled Venezuela for much of the next 59 years. In 1909, Castro was succeeded by General Juan Vicente Gómez, who seized power from the ailing president and subsequently controlled Venezuela with an iron hand until his death in 1935.

Prior to Gómez's exploitation of Venezuela's rich oil reserves in the 192os, Venezuela was predominantly an agrarian country, which exported coffee and cacao. The economy was strengthened under Castro, but unlike Colombia where President Reyes strongly encouraged the country's industrial development, Castro did not promote industry in any way. Nor did Gómez, except to foster industries such as refining that were related to the discovery of oil. Beginning with Castro, the country did not have a successful history with foreign investors, except those who invested in the oil fields. Among them were the Big Three American oil companies—Standard Oil, Shell, and Gulf—to whom Gómez sold almost all the country's concessions Consequently there was little incentive to encourage other enterprises.

Venezuela also had far fewer immigrants than either Argentina or Brazil and thus lacked the industrial innovation that immigrants brought to some other Latin American countries. Local goods were produced—primarily foodstuffs, beverages, cigarettes, and related small items—but the rapid expansion of oil revenues facilitated the purchase of foreign goods and reduced the incentive for developing local industries further. By the 193os, Venezuela had become the wealthiest country in Latin America and the world's largest oil exporter, second only to the United States in total oil production. The boundary between public and private revenue was blurred and Gómez appropriated considerable oil revenues for himself. He brooked no dissent and continually censored the press and jailed or exiled those who criticized him.

After Gómez's death, Eleazar López Contreras, another caudillo from Táchira, became president and allowed a year of liberal reforms before adopting a more dictatorial stance, although freedom of the press and public debate remained relatively open. López Contreras founded a number of new economic and social institutions, which included the reform of the traditional Academy of Art. Supported by the Ministry of Education, the Academia de Bellas Artes was reorganized and renamed the Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Artes Applicadas de Caracas (School of Plastic and Applied Arts of Caracas). Its new director was Antonio Edmundo Monsanto (189o-1948), who believed that art could not stand alone, but had to relate to society. Consequently, he introduced a Section of Applied Arts, which included studios for graphic arts, stained glass, technical drawing, textiles, fresco painting, ceramics, and carving in stone and wood. The reorganization of the art academy came from the recognition that Venezuela needed to prepare applied artists for industry. As a consequence, the school became the principal training ground for many of the country's most important designers in the post-war years.

Another indication that López Contreras recognized the importance of developing a diversified economy was his introduction in 1938 of the Triennial Plan, which included government support for industry. He also sponsored a pavilion for the 1939 World's Fair in New York. Though the Venezuelan economy was still underdeveloped, with the exception of the oil fields, the government commissioned the American architects Skidmore & Owings and John Morse to design a pavilion that would project the image of Venezuela as a modern nation with a diverse flourishing economy. They incorporated the most contemporary techniques of modern architecture including glass curtain walls and a cantilevered roof. As a structure, the pavilion was impressive, but just as the country's oil riches encouraged the continual importing of foreign goods, so was the pavilion another example of importation; in this case it represented a modernist sensibility that was in many ways at odds with the repressive ways that Gómez and then López Contreras had governed Venezuela since 1908. The interior of the pavilion, whose set pieces were several large murals and a group of large sculpted figures representing Venezuelan products, was organized by Luis Alfredo López Méndez (1901–1996), a landscape painter who had spent many years abroad. Clearly López Contreras had the ambition to make Venezuela into a modern nation with appropriate