economic and social institutions, a goal that Gómez lacked. In some ways, the vision of López Contreras might be related to what Getulio Vargas was trying to accomplish in Brazil during the same years. However, Vargas fostered far more industrial development than López Contreras was able to do and he could rely as well on a substratum of modernist culture that enabled Brazil to project an image of modernity to the world with its own cultural resources.

In 194I, yet another Táchira general, Isaias Mediana Angarita, succeeded López Contreras and he remained in power until the end of World War II. More than the generals who preceded him, Medina Angarita permitted the free activity of political parties and promoted a number of constitutional reforms, which included granting women the right to vote.

## Graphic design

## Magazines, newspapers, and books

Although the majority of the Venezuelan population was illiterate in the late 19th century, the country's cosmopolitan class supported various newspapers and illustrated magazines similar to comparable social groups in other Latin American countries. The leading magazine was El Cojo Ilustrado (The Illustrated Cripple), which was published in Caracas. It was actually a promotional publication of the Fábrica de Tabacos “El Cojo" (El Cojo Tobacco Factory). From the time it began in 1892 to when it ceased publication in 1915, El Cojo Ilustrado published Venezuela's best writers and exemplified an extremely high quality of printing. It had a three-column layout and its covers featured reproductions of fine art as well as imported illustrations. Besides Caracas, the city of Maracaibo, capital of the state of Zulia, also had a rich publishing history, which included the magazine El Zulia Ilustrado (Zulia Illustrated) (1888–1891) and the daily newspaper El Fonógrafo (The Phonograph), which was published between 1879 and 1917.

The leading printing establishment of the period was Litografía y Típografía del Comercio (Commercial

Lithography and Typography). It was founded by a German immigrant, Pius Schlageter (dates unconfirmed), whose son Eduardo (1893-1974), a painter, also worked in the business and became one of Venezuela's leading poster artists in the 193os. Litografía y Típografía del Comercio printed the first four-color magazine covers in Venezuela, introducing advanced techniques of lithographic printing that had been developed in Germany. Among the firm's clients was the magazine El Farol (The Streetlamp), whose covers it printed for many years.

Pius Schlageter's enterprise was a precedent for Tipografía Vargas, which Juan de Guruceaga (1897– 1974) established in 1919. Tipografía Vargas was a multifaceted organization that consisted of a print shop; a publishing house, Editorial Elite; and some of the leading newspapers and magazines that were published in Venezuela during the 192os and 193os. In 1925, de Guruceaga launched Elite, a weekly illustrated publication that became the major cultural magazine of that period. The best writers and illustrators in Caracas wrote and drew for it and photography was also a feature.

Two years later, de Guruceaga introduced a daily newspaper, Mundial, and in 193o the children's magazine Kakadu, which lasted only two years. Kakadu was followed by another publication for children, Juan Bimbita, in 1940. In 1935, Tipografía Vargas began to publish a second daily newspaper, Ahora (Now). Profiting from the more open publishing climate that followed the death of Juan Vicente Gómez, Ahora became the country's principal journal of opinion through its promotion of a new democratic culture. Among its leading contributors was the caricaturist Mariano Medina Febres (1912-d.o.d. unconfirmed), known as Medo, whose sharp political caricatures helped to raise hopes for a more open political system. Medo also created occasional book covers for Editorial Elite and in another vein invented the cartoon character Juan Bimba, a young boy from the countryside who for a time became a national Venezuelan icon.