During the 192os and 193os, Tipografía Vargas collaborated with many writers, graphic artists, and illustrators, particularly those who opposed the regimes of Gómez and López Contreras. Prominent among the graphic artists who worked with the firm were two men with many talents: Leoncio Martínez (1888-1941), a humorist, journalist, commercial artist, and caricaturist whose nom de plume was Leo; and Rafael Rivero Oramas (1904–1992), an artist, art director, illustrator, film director, and writer.

In 1912, Martínez published a newspaper article that urged a renewal in the arts. It served as a call to a group of artists and writers who founded the Círculo de Bellas Artes, an organization intended to counter the conservative policies of the Academia de Bellas Artes. Artist members explored European artistic trends, although they were most attracted to Impressionism rather than to any of the subsequent progressive and avant-garde movements. The writers in the group included essayists, novelists, and poets, many of whom became Venezuela's most prominent literary and journalistic figures in the ensuing years.

In 1923, Martínez and Francisco Pimentel (Job Pim) (1889-1942), an author of humorous verse, founded a weekly magazine titled Fantoches (Masks), which Martínez edited and for which he drew covers and provided interior illustrations. Fantoches became a platform for much of Leo's criticism of Juan Vicente Gómez and Eleazar López Contreras. As a consequence, both dictators put him in prison at various times. Martínez was also one of the leading commercial artists in Caracas, providing advertising illustrations for many clients, while continuing to collaborate as a journalist and illustrator for various publications.

With Juan de Guruceaga, Rafael Rivero Oramas was the co-founder of Kakadu, for which he served as editor, illustrator, and designer. Later he edited, designed, and illustrated two other children's magazines, both published by the Ministry of Education, beginning in 1938—Onza, Tigre, Léon (Snow Leopard, Tiger, Lion), and Tricolor, which followed it. Rivero Oramas also created the graphic look for Elite. He designed covers, provided illustrations, designed the various iterations of the title letters, drew initials, and laid out articles. In addition, he designed many book covers for Editorial Elite, including covers for the novels of major authors such as Arturo Uslar Pietri, Julián Padron, and Rómulo Gallegos. Rivero Oramas' cover for Gallegos' seminal novel Doña Bárbara (1929) represents the confrontation between civilization and the harshness of Venezuela's rural plains as a clash of abstract elements. Other book covers he did for Editorial Elite also averted illustrative conventions in favor of strong abstract or semi-abstract designs. Writing many years later about Rivero Oramas, the artist and graphic designer Carlos Cruz-Diez considered him to have been the first Venezuelan graphic designer. Rivero Oramas talked about layout and not design, Cruz-Diez wrote, noting as well that he could do anything from lettering to illustrating, making engravings, and even printing.

## Advertising

Due to the sharp difference of literacy and cultural activity between urban and rural areas, advertising was directed at urban dwellers. By the beginning of the 2oth century, advertisements with illustrations were appearing regularly in Venezuela's newspapers and illustrated magazines. Ads varied in their design from purely typographic ones that drew on a wide variety of display faces to those that combined illustrations with separate texts or integrated the lettering directly into the illustration.

Domestic and foreign products that were featured included foodstuffs, cosmetics and perfumes, cigarettes, and clothing. Among the foreign companies that advertised in Venezuela during this period were RCA Victor, Burroughs, Colgate, Michelin, and Bayer. While most of the early ads were mundane both in copy and illustrations, Bayer introduced a sophisticated series for its pharmaceutical products featuring lengthy narrative texts and illustrations in varied styles including delicate drawings that recalled Art Nouveau.