Whereas the artists who drew the first advertising illustrations are mainly anonymous, by the 192os a number of recognized artists and caricaturists were starting to do advertising work. In 192i, the painter Raúl Santana (1883-1966), who had studied in the United States, opened the first advertising studio in Venezuela. He helped to raise the level of advertising design, particularly for fashion products and perfumes such as Guerlain from Paris. In addition to his advertising work, Santana published caricatures during the 193os in Elite under his nom de plume, Santico.

Ads with a more local sensibility and a greater sense of humor were created by Leoncio Martínez, whose drawings were complemented by the copy lines of the poet Job Pim. Alejandro Alfonzo Larrain (19o8- d.o.d. unconfirmed), known as Alfa, was also doing advertising illustrations during the 192os. In 1924, Alfa and Rivero Oramas, both of whom had worked with Raúl Santana, created their own studio for advertising illustration called Gráfica Sum. Unfortunately, it closed quickly due to a lack of clients willing to purchase illustrations. Subsequently Larrain established another firm, Publicidad Alfa (Alfa Advertising), which became a precursor of later advertising agencies.

Beginning in 1925 Vepaco (Venezuelan Public Advertising Company) pioneered the introduction of outdoor advertising. Billboards they constructed in urban areas as well as along the roadsides advertised the products of a new type of corporate client exemplified by Shell Oil as well as Bandera Roja (Red Flag) cigarettes, whose campaigns featured occasional illustrations by Rafael Rivero Oramas. Besides the Santana studio and Vepaco, the most important agency before World War II was ARS Publicidad, which was founded in 1938 by Carlos Eduardo Frías (1906–1986), the author and journalist who was also a co-founder of the aforementioned newspaper Ahora, published by Tipografía Vargas. Originally Frías joined with Edgar Anzola, who came from the world of broadcasting, to form Anzola & Frías, a name that was soon changed to Publicitas and finally to ARS Publicidad. The founders understood advertising as a modern practice and developed the capacity for integrated campaigns, following the American model. They created separate departments for radio, film, posters, and the press. Frías considered advertising to be a cultural activity and involved some of Venezuela's and even Latin America's leading writers in his campaigns.

## Uruguay

Like its neighbor, Argentina, Uruguay experienced extensive immigration from Europe at the beginning of the 2oth century, largely from Italy and Spain. Some immigrants bought land and others gravitated towards the capital city, Montevideo, where they entered professions and started small businesses as well as some industrial enterprises. Much of Uruguay's wealth came from the export of beef, leather hides, and wool. With a population of less than one million in 19o0 and just over two million at the end of World War II, Uruguay had difficulty developing an internal market for its own manufactured goods and like other Latin American countries relied heavily on imports until World War I, when the country began to manufacture more products of its own. Small businesses, located primarily in Montevideo, created a range of goods including clothing, wine, and tobacco. Skilied artisans, many from Italy, supported the building industry with workshops that produced furniture, decorative ironwork, stained glass, and tiles.

José Batlle y Ordóńez, who was president from 1903 to 1907 and again from 191 to 1915 but nonetheless dominated Uruguayan politics until his death in 1929, instituted a number of economic, social, and political reforms including a constitutional amendment that divided power between the president and a national administrative council. Unlike many other leaders in Latin Aerica, Batlle y Ordóñez was strongly committed to the industrial development of his country, one consequence of which was an extensive program of industrial arts education.