## Circulo de Bellas Artes

In 19o5, two years after Battle y Ordóñez became president, a group of businessmen, intellectuals, and artists met in Montevideo to establish the Circulo de Bellas Artes (Fine Arts Circle). The group was interested in the education of painters and sculptors but also in providing training for the industrial and graphic arts. They believed that the industrial arts were important for the nation's economic development and studios were established in the new school for working in plaster and for ironwork, carpentry, and ornament applied to architecture. Students could also study the graphic arts to prepare for work in advertising. The first director, the painter Carlos María Herrera (1875-1914), ran the school from its founding until his death nine years later.

Many of Uruguay's best artists graduated from the Circulo, and a number of them returned to teach there. Government grants were obtained for some of the students to study in Europe and consequently they and the faculty were aware of various European trends and developments in the arts. Students tended to study with academic painters when they went abroad and neither they nor their professors promoted the avant-garde movements or schools such as the Bauhaus. Circulo graduates, however, formed the core of Uruguay's modern art movement, known as planismo, because it derived from Cézanne's technique of building up an image with planes.

Until the Circulo ceased to offer its decorative arts courses in 1923 in order to concentrate exclusively on fine art, these courses were taught by artists with no experience in industry. They featured drawing skills, as instructors did earlier in Britain's Schools of Design, and students learned to render natural forms such as leaves and flowers as well as birds, animals, and insects. Among the artists who studied or taught at the Circulo and had some involvement in the decorative or graphic arts either as teachers of designers were Carmelo de Arzadun (1888–1968), Guillermo Laborde (1886-194o), Domingo Bazurro (dates unconfirmed), Humberto Causa (1890-1925), Guillermo Rodríguez (1889–d.o.d. unconfirmed), and Vicente Puig (dates unconfirmed),

## Regionalism and its opposition

Besides the decorative arts courses at the Circulo de Bellas Artes, other schools began to provide instruction in these subjects as well. At the Faculty of Architecture, which was founded in 1915, courses in decorative arts as related to building and construction were introduced as part of the students’"artistic preparation." Such courses were developed more fully, however, at the Escuela Nacional de Artes y Oficios (National School of Arts and Trades) where the lawyer and artist Pedro Figari (1861-1938) served as director between 1915 and 1917. Figari was a controversial figure because he introduced the study of indigenous design into the curriculum, arguing for the importance of creating a national identity by incorporating visual motifs and forms that originated in Uruguay's Indian culture. Figari espoused a synthesis of iconographies drawn from nature as well as cultural sources. This was evident in the furniture, wicker objects, ceramics, stained glass, and woven fabrics that were on display at the Exposition de Arte Regionale (Exhibition of Regional Art), which the Escuela Nacional de Artes y Oficios sponsored in 1916.

Critics from the Faculty of Architecture, who espoused a rationalism derived from French classicism, accused Figari and his students of imitating the customs of cave dwellers by resorting to primitive methods of production and ignoring the tenets of science and progress. Due to the controversy that Figari created with his curriculum, his teaching career ended in 1917 and he subsequently devoted much of his energy to painting, becoming well known for his depictions of regional and indigenous themes.

Figari was not alone in his espousal of regionalism, however. This theme was reinforced by the architect Román Berro (1889-d.o.d. unconfirmed), who proposed to the First Pan American Congress of Architects, when it met in Montevideo in 1920,