that architects should seek to create an architecture of the Americas through regional ornament that in each region would express the soul of the race. This fusion of regionalism and nationalism, and especially the assertion of racial identity, would play out in the decorative arts and architecture of Uruguay and other nations as well during the interwar years, especially in Brazil, Mexico, and Chile.

An example of how indigenous themes could be adapted to architecture as Román Berro had called for was the interior that the painter Milo Beretta (1875-1935), a collaborator of Figari's, designed for the house of philosopher Carlos Vaz Ferreira around 192o. Beretta's integrated design recalled the Art Nouveau villas of Hector Guimard, Victor Horta, and Josef Hoffmann. Beretta studied painting in Paris in the 189os and would certainly have been aware of such examples. He designed a ceiling for Vaz Ferreira's study that integrated richly colored indigenous motifs into the design and he repeated such motifs as decoration on pieces of oak furniture. He also designed a number of lamps for the house, though in a modern style. The Casa Vas Ferreira exemplified the collaboration with architects that various proponents of the decorative arts had been calling for and it demonstrated that indigenous motifs could be successfully applied to the decoration of a modern dwelling.

## Industrial schools

In 1916, the government mounted a vigorous campaign to expand training in the industrial arts. A law passed that year mandated the formation of a Higher Council of Industrial Education. Initially it was headed by Figari, who was subsequently succeeded by the artist Pedro Blanes Viale (1879–1926). Viale supervised the creation of three industrial schools in Montevideo: one for the building industries, one for the decorative arts, and one for "feminine industries," the Escuela Industria Feminina (Women's Industrial School). Evening courses for workers were introduced as were industrial courses in other cities and towns around the country.

The aim of the schools as indicated in the official literature was to train students to create forms and decoration for industrial products. In fact, their graduates were sought by architects, furniture firms, decorative arts studios, textile factories, and the graphic arts industries. The Higher Council of Industrial Education published a magazine, Trabajo (Work), in which student projects were documented. It circulated widely and did much to promote the students accomplishments.

Courses were taught by well-known artists, many from the Circulo de Bellas Artes. Some artists such as Guillermo Laborde taught classes in the Circulo as well as the Industrial School of Decorative Arts. Laborde was primarily a painter, but was a man of many talents who played an important role in disseminating the spirit of Art Deco in Uruguay. Known for his murals as well as his paintings, he also occasionally designed posters, winning several prizes in a contest to create sports posters for Uruguay's Centenary celebration. He was also a designer of costumes and sets for theatrical productions and in addition did the reliefs for the wooden doors of a private villa.

In his studio for decorative painting in the Industrial School, Laborde had his students design tapestries, curtains, cushions, friezes, and other decorative objects, applying to them a repertory of decorative motifs similar to those of the best French Art Deco designers. As in the designs of Paul Poiret's École Martine, for example, Laborde's students adopted a repertoire of stylized flowers, foliage, birds, and other natural forms.

National industries were promoted at the Exposición de las Industrias Nacionales (Exposition of National Industries) of 1928 and then in the Semana Uruguaya (Uruguay Week) of 1931. With the successful spread of industrial arts courses throughout the country, the government founded a new institution in 1942, the Universidad del Trabajo (University of Work). The driving force behind it was Dr. José F. Arias (dates unconfirmed), who had proposed such a