Argentino in Buenos Aires, it became Uruguay's leading illustrated magazine during the 192os, featuring photography rather than illustration. Mundo Uruguayo, which was published by the Capurro advertising agency, hired Montevideo's leading photographers such as Anselmo Carbone (dates unconfirmed) and Horacio (dates unconfirmed) and Alfredo Canto (dates unconfirmed). The covers frequently featured photographs, but artists did many of them. At times, the visual references were too close to the Saturday Evening Post, particularly the covers of Norman Rockwell or James Leyendecker, but other covers made reference to French fashion illustration in a less derivative way. As with its counterparts abroad, Mundo Uruguayo purveyed images of modern life—automobiles, women with short hair and the latest Paris fashions, and dancing Negros whose depictions suffered from excessive caricature.

## Books and literary journals

Uruguay had its share of literary journals, but the engagement of its writers with the avant-garde movements abroad was considerably less than in Argentina, Brazil, or Chile. One influence on Uruguayan poetry was the Spanish literary movement known as ultraísmo (ultraism), which encouraged experimentation with poetic language, particularly by including references to the modern world and technology. Among the Uruguayan poets influenced by the movement was Alfredo Mario Ferreiro, whose book of poems El hombre que se comió un autobús: Poemas con olor a nafta (The Man Who Ate a Bus: Poems with the Odor of Naphtha) appeared in 1927. The cover—most likely a linoleum cut-by the artist Melchior Méndez Magariños (1885–1945) is perhaps indicative of how far Uruguay was outside the mainstream of avant-garde movements (Plate 58). The artist sought to break up the title visually, just as poets did with their texts, but the breaks are awkward, the lettering lacks legibility, and the swirls and spikes of the background ornamentation make no reference to the text nor do they constitute a coherent decorative design. Cover designs for La Pluma (The Plume), Uruguay's leading literary journal published between 1927 and 1931, were no more effective in adopting sophisticated international publication graphics to the Uruguayan milieu.

One exception was the artist Joaquin Torres-Garcia (1874-1949), who had studied in Europe and worked there extensively. A co-founder of the Cercle et Carré (Circle and Square) group of abstract artists in Paris, he returned to Montevideo in 1934 and there founded the Asociacíon de Arte Constructivo (Association of Constructive Art), which published numerous books of his lectures and theories about Constructivism. Torres-Garcia designed the books himself, featuring hand lettering and drawings on some of the covers and bold san serif type on others. He also lettered some of his texts himself instead of using type. In 1944, he set up a workshop to introduce students to his ideas and he founded a new constructivist journal, Removedor, for which he did the design.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

In addition to the books on Latin American history, industrialization, and art mentioned in the bibliography of Chapter 28, a number of books related to design in the countries discussed in this chapter have been helpful. Henry Hirsch, Industrial Development in a Traditional Society: The Conflict of Entrepreneurship and Modernization in Chile contains valuable material on Chilean industrialization. Eduardo Castillo Espinoza has written extensively on the School of Applied Arts at the University of Chile in a book he edited, Artesanos, Artistas, Artífices: La Escuela de Artes Aplicadas de la Universidad de Chile, 1928–1968, and in an English language article, "The School of Applied Arts, University of Chile (1928–1968)," Design Issues 25, no. 2 (Spring 2oo9). My principal source for design in Uruguay is the exhibition catalog Los Veinte: El Projecto Uruguayo: Art y Diseño de un Imaginario, 1916–1934.

Graphic design in Chile has been extremely well documented in Pedro Álvarez Caselli's thorough