# Chapter 31: Commonwealth Countries: Canada, Australia, and New Zealand 1900-1939

## Introduction

In 1917, the British Commonwealth of Nations came into being, recognizing some members of the union as countries rather than colonies. The 1931 Statute of Westminster ended British parliamentary control over all the Commonwealth parliaments and made them sovereign states that nonetheless shared allegiance to the British Crown. Canada and New Zealand acknowledged this status readily but Australia did not ratify the statute until 1942. Although the three nations had somewhat different histories of economic development, they did share some common factors, notably the English language and similar access to events in Europe and the United States. By virtue of Canada's close geographical relation to America, the two countries developed closer ties than did Australia and New Zealand with the United States, even though American manufacturers actively sought to build markets for their goods in those countries as well. French Canadians established ties with France and had a relation with that country that was unique among the three nations.

## Canada

Wilfrid Laurier, Canada's Prime Minister between 1896 and 191, was a staunch nationalist who sought to create a single political entity from various provinces and territories. By 19o5 the job was completed. Laurier wished to separate Canadian policies from Britain's and to establish Canada as a separate nation within the British Empire. A test came when Britain asked Canada to send soldiers to fight on its side in the Anglo-Boer War of 1899. Canada compromised by sending volunteers to serve under the British command.

The French nationalist movement, led by Henri Bourassa, was fiercely opposed to British collaboration and sought autonomy for Canada. In 1903, Bourassa founded the Ligue Nationaliste (Nationalist League) to encourage a broad Canadian spirit in the Frenchspeaking population, and members of his movement established a newspaper, Le Devoir (Duty), in 191o to espouse their views.

During World War I, when Laurier was no longer Prime Minister, the Canadian government instituted compulsory military service in the British Army, but the policy divided the country, particularly strengthening French Canadian opposition to British requests for military support. While Canada was loosening its political ties with Britain, it was strengthening its economic ties with the United States. The 2oth century witnessed a new relationship between the two countries, as the United States became Canada's largest trading partner. However, Canada remained primarily a producer of raw materials that were generated from mining and agriculture, while also becoming a leading producer of pulp and paper.

World War I strengthened Canada's capacity for mass production as factories turned out a range of war materiel from packing crates to training aircraft, but, unlike the United States, these enterprises, with rare exceptions, did not coalesce into an industrial system with a highly developed infrastructure that grew on the basis of continuous invention and vertical integration of companies into large manufacturing conglomerates. With a few exceptions, Canadian entrepreneurs were more inclined to license American patents than to develop their own culture of product development. The largest enterprises were in the field of textiles, transport, and farm equipment, with only modest manufacturing of other goods such as appliances. Canada did have its own furniture industry, although manufacturers