tended to follow styles from abroad rather than create their own.

During the interwar years, Quebec espoused an independent policy of economic development that strongly promoted crafts and small-scale production rather than mass manufacturing. Consequently, Quebecois entrepreneurs had considerably less to do with American companies seeking to establish subsidiaries or sell patents than did their counterparts in Ontario and elsewhere in Anglophone Canada. But industry and raw material production throughout the country suffered during the Great Depression and the economy barely recovered by 1939.

## Furniture and domestic goods

Modern furniture design was slow to find a reception in Canada. With the exception of Quebec's relation to France, Canadians were relatively isolated from European cultural movements in the years before World War II. For the most part, major furniture companies continued to specialize in copies of historic styles. From the 188os, western Ontario, which had attracted a large number of skilled tradespeople as immigrants, was the center of Canada's furniture industry just as Grand Rapids, Michigan, was in the United States. Canadian furniture companies included Andrew Malcolm, the Adams Furniture Company, the Knechtel Furniture Company, and J. W. Kilgour, which, unlike the others, was in Quebec.

The Globe Furniture Company specialized in furniture for schools and churches, while the Imperial Rattan Company and the Toronto Rattan Company made furniture of cane and rattan. Most of the latter followed conventional precedents for such pieces, but designers of the Toronto Rattan Company's Art-Reed Furniture strove for a contemporary look, combining rattan frames with geometric designs and cushions covered with fabric that had colorful abstract patterns.

As historian Virginia Wright points out, the earliest modern furniture in Canada, made of metal or molded plywood, was produced for institutions——schools, hospitals, assembly halls, or cafeterias. The Metal Craft Company of Toronto was a leading manufacturer of metal furniture for clinics, hospitals, and doctors' offices, producing a line of tables, chairs, and cabinets made of sheet steel or steel tubing. Chrome-plated steel stools could be found at lunch counters and cafes such as the one in the basement of Simpson's Department Store in Toronto.

Wright also notes that Canadian furniture tended to be based on examples that were either popular abroad or else were created by foreign designers. The Standard Tube Company, a manufacturer of hospital equipment, produced the first Canadian cantilever chairs, which were inexpensive copies of Mies van der Rohe's MR2o tubular steel armchair of 1927 with the difference that the Canadian chairs substituted patterned fabric for Mies's canvas or leather seats and backs. Both the Andrew Malcolm Furniture Company and McLagan Furniture introduced wooden furniture lines that were drawn from the work of Gilbert Rohde, design director for the Herman Miller Company in Michigan. Snyder's, a furniture manufacturer in Waterloo, Ontario, commissioned the American designer Russel Wright to create a line of living room, dining room, and dinette furniture called "Modern Maple," which consisted of pieces with gently rounded corners and contained a living room couch and armchairs with curved armrests. The pieces were modern in their simplicity and absence of historic references but still cozy and without the austerity of form or materials that characterized pieces designed by Mies or Le Corbusier's studio. Even the Knechtel Furniture Company, which specialized in period styles, produced a line of dining room furniture that it called "modernistic," although the designs were pastiched elements taken from different sources.

Beginning in the mid-192os, modern furniture was also produced by a small Toronto company, Metalsmiths Co. Ltd, whose principal was an architect, Kenneth Noxon (1900–1979). Metalsmiths Co. Ltd specialized in custom metalwork for the home, not only producing furniture but also porch and interior stair railings, fire screens and andirons, plant stands, and many other items. Noxon's furniture did not have a single style. Chairs, for example, with painted wrought iron frames, might have designs drawn from modern or historic sources or they might be completely fanciful. The chairs could be made entirely of iron or else iron frames could support cushions. Besides wrought iron, Noxon also worked in cane and glass. At various times, he operated his own retail stores where pieces could be purchased or ordered.

The large department stores, notably Eaton's and Simpson's, both based in Toronto, were influential in shaping public taste for furniture. Like their counterparts in Paris, they promoted new styles through the exhibition of model rooms and they occasionally manufactured their own furniture or commissioned designs from outside designers for original pieces or sets. The T. Eaton Company, owners of Eaton's, and other retailers purchased French furniture and fixtures in the art moderne style in Paris during or shortly after the Exposition des Arts Décoratifs in 1925. They either sold it or manufactured copies, also importing "French" furniture in the moderne style from factories in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Eaton's hired a French architect, René Cera (1895–1992), to design furniture and room displays for their stores as well as interiors for their clients' homes. For their store in Montreal, a city where a familiarity with French styles and trends was greater than elsewhere in Canada, the T. Eaton Company hired a French decorator in 1928, Jeannette Meunier (dates unconfirmed), a graduate of the École des Beaux Arts in Paris. With a mandate to look broadly at modern home furnishing styles, not just French ones, she headed up a new department, l'Intérieur Moderne, which displayed local and imported furniture, fabrics, wallpaper, and accessories. In 1937, Eaton's in Montreal introduced a small section of furniture in the Swedish Modern and American styles.

Canada also had a burgeoning radio industry in which a number of manufacturers were participating by the 192os. Early sets ran on batteries, but

Ted Rogers (1900-1939) made a breakthrough when he developed a tube that could run on household current. Consequently the Rogers Batteryless Radio Receiving Sets gained a large share of the Canadian radio market. Early battery-driven sets were essentially boxes of polished wood with the dials on the front, but after Rogers obtained a patent for his AC tube in 1927, he began to market a floor console made of walnut with a receiver housed in a box that sat on four cabriole legs.

Regardless of product type, Canadian manufacturers made little or no use of industrial designers, a profession that did not emerge in Canada until after World War II. As Virginia Wright notes, furniture manufacturers relied on in-house staff, including the sales department, to determine new product lines. Sales managers consulted with store buyers to learn about competitors' products that might help to determine what their own companies should produce. Appliance firms such as Ted Rogers' simply copied prevailing designs without attempting to create new ones. Clearly, the modern streamlined forms that American industrial designers created had little influence on Canadian manufacturers during these years.

The Royal Canadian Academy of Arts tried to promote industrial design in a 1938 exhibit, Canadian Industrial Arts, which was held at the Art Gallery of Ontario. One of its purposes was to entice Canadian artists to design for manufacturing based on their sensitivity to beauty, while another was to arouse public demand for better design quality in Canadian products. However, the exhibition was far from inspirational, since it consisted of furniture, tableware, packaging, and a few appliances of which few gave evidence of any original design. One step forward was the inclusion of a section for Industrial Arts and Crafts in the new Federation of Canadian Artists that was formed in 1942.