## Quebec: furniture, decorative arts, and crafts

Jean-Marie Gauvreau and the Ecole du Meuble In a seminal book of 1929, Nos Intérieurs de Demain (Our Interiors of Tomorrow), the Quebecois furniture and interior designer Jean-Marie Gauvreau (1903-1970) expressed his frustration with the state of the decorative arts in Quebec. In 1922, Gauvreau had graduated with a diploma in cabinetry from Montreal's École Technique, which was constructed between 1910 and 1911. The school originally specialized in carpentry, electrical work, ironwork, and smelting, with cabinetry a later addition.

After further study and some work experience, Gauvreau headed for Paris in 1926. There he became the first Canadian to study at the École Boulle, the renowned school of furniture and interior design, from which he graduated in 1929. In Paris, Gauvreau absorbed the modern spirit of decorative art that had been generated by the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs and he became familiar with the work of leading decorators such as Émile-Jacques Ruhlmann, Louis Sognot, and Leon Caillet (see Chapter 22).

Gauvreau believed that the French decorative arts movement could inspire designers in Quebec to produce decorative arts, especially furniture, of high quality. Strongly opposed to the mass production methods of American furniture makers, Gauvreau espoused original craftsmanship that made use of local materials, especially wood, which was abundant in Quebec.

Gauvreau's book, Nos Intérieurs de Demain, published after his return from France, served as a manifesto for the multifarious activities he would engage in to promote the decorative arts and crafts in Quebec during the ensuing years. Returning to Montreal in 1929, he became a professor of cabinetry at the École Technique in 193o. That year he and Louis Athanase-David (1882-1953), the Provincial Secretary, established the École du Meuble (School of Furniture), which began with three students as a department of the École Technique. Both Gauvreau and Athanase-David envisioned the school within a larger project of developing Quebec industry. It received government support because it was intended to satisfy a number of objectives—help create a market for domestic products, rectify a prior provincial neglect of the trades, provide new jobs for craftsmen, and revive a dying tradition of Quebec craftsmanship. An important predecessor of the École du Meuble was the École du Conseil des Arts et Manufactures (School of the Council of Arts and Manufactures), which had been established in the 188os, following a report by the Council of Arts and Manufactures that assessed the state of applied arts education in Quebec. This school, with branches in different cities for artisans and apprentices, provided courses in drawing, architecture, decorative painting, and lithography, along with shoemaking and dressmaking.

By 1935 the École du Meuble had become independent and wąs made official by a provincial law of 1937. It expanded rapidly throughout the 193os. To supplement the cabinetry course, Gauvreau initiated a program in interior decoration and applied art, the only one in Canada at the time. Modeled after a comparable program at the École Boulle, it was initiated in 1935 and was headed from 1936 to 1945 by the Montreal architect Marcel Parizeau (1898–1945), who, like Gauvreau, had also studied in Paris. As both architect and interior decorator, Parizeau created individualized furniture and interiors for the homes he designed in an art moderne style. Like the decorators in Paris, he worked for the luxury market in Montreal. His furniture, however, made with the help of his students, tended towards the more simplified designs of Le Corbusier and Mallet Stevens, although his pieces were bolder and more expressive than the typical École du Meuble pieces.

Among the other teachers at the school during the interwar years, besides Parizeau and Gauvreau himself, was Alphonse Saint-Jacques (dates unconfirmed), a mainstay of the program, who taught