furniture design, assisted by two experienced cabinetmakers, using a shop manual that was the same one used at the École Boulle. Elzéar Soucy (1876–1970), a highly regarded sculptor with civic, ecclesiastical, and private clients, taught wood sculpture and woodcarving as they related to cabinetmaking and interior design. A specialist in liturgical sculpture, which had been traditionally widely practiced in Quebec, Soucy kept alive a skill that was gradually dying out, as were other craft skills in the province. Paul-Émile Borduas (1905–1960) taught drawing between 1935 and 1937, emphasizing the skills needed to make visual presentations of furniture and ornament designs. Borduas was a painter who became a leader of Quebec's vigorous school of abstract art after World War II.

Gauvreau placed considerable emphasis on traditional techniques of solid wood construction. Many of the designs followed those of the modern French decorators. Gauvreau disliked standardized manufacturing and the use of industrial materials, thus he rejected the pedagogy adopted by Bauhaus designers in the 192os and refused as well the American streamlined aesthetic. Based on French models, the furniture produced at the school possessed a spare formal quality. Many pieces had elaborate inlaid marquetry designs and some included components of wrought iron or hammered metal.

Besides the professors at the École du Meuble, a few independent craftsmen also contributed to the development of Quebec's artisan industries. Prominent among them was Paul Beau (1871–1949), a metalsmith who refused to rely on machines, preferring to work by hand as did his European predecessors. He produced a wide range of objects and was known for combining metals of contrasting colors such as brass and red copper. He was fond of ornament, whether Greek geometric patterns on a classical urn or naturalistic leaves on a letterbox. He also undertook numerous architectural commissions, producing electric fixtures, fireplace accessories, door handles, wrought-iron grilles, and even the occasional weathervane.

## The Quebec handicraft revival

The founding of the École du Meuble in 193o was related to a larger plan that the provincial government initiated the same year to revive the handicrafts in Quebec. In 1929, provincial officials launched a study to consider the condition of Quebec's home industries, discovering in almost all cases that old techniques had been lost and taste had declined. In 193o, responding to the study, Quebec's Department of Agriculture created the École Provinciale des Arts Domestiques (Provincial School of Domestic Arts) in Quebec City to train nuns and other women to produce handicrafts and teach handicraft production that could serve as the basis of commercially viable industries. Many trainees were teachers from various schools known as Écoles Ménagères Régionales (Regional Household Science Schools). Most of the staff were handicraft experts hired from Europe and the United States. The emphasis was on weaving, although courses on tanning were added. Ellen McLeod notes that the school sought standardized methods to replace individual techniques, although all artists were urged to use patterns and designs from Quebec. By 1933, more than 2,ooo women had registered for courses at the school or for courses taught by teachers who trained there. Concomitant with this movement, the journalist Françoise Gaudet-Smet (1902-1986) advocated a role for rural women as artisans in her magazine Paysana, founded in 1938.

The École du Meuble and the handicraft revival had several objectives in common. Both were part of a larger ambition to improve the economic competitiveness of Quebec. Neither favored mass production and both were based on the belief that craft production, whether for expensive furniture or tourist rugs, was more compatible with the Quebecois way of life than industrial culture.

Whereas the handicraft revival drew on Quebec's indigenous craft traditions, the École du Meuble sought its design sources in the highly developed aesthetic atmosphere of Paris. Throughout the 193os, Gauvreau continued to be a strong voice for developing