the handicrafts as an instrument of Quebec's economic development. In his 1929 book, Nos Intérieurs de Demain, he had called for artists, industrialists, and educators to work together just as the founders of the Deutscher Werkbund had done in 1907. In 1939, Gauvreau suggested to the provincial government that it create a center to produce carpets and hooked rugs, and subsequently he encouraged the painter Georges-Edouard Tremblay (1902–1987) to open a studio where he could make hooked rugs based on his paintings.

The following year, Gauvreau published another book, Artisans du Quebec (Artisans of Quebec), in which he presented a survey of Quebec crafts ranging from crocheted tapestries by rural women to the design of canoes. What united all these projects was his advocacy of small craft-based enterprises as the basis of Quebec's provincial development. He envisioned regional specialization as a viable strategy for Canada's national economy and outlined new markets such as tourism for Quebec crafts. Gauvreau espoused the creation of a ceramics industry and questioned why Quebec craftsman didn't make their own pottery to compete with imports from Italy, Mexico, or Japan. In 1943, he saw part of his vision realized when the provincial Ministry of Trade and Commerce organized an Office Provincial de l'Artisanat et de la Petite Industries (Provincial Office of Craft and Small Industries), over which he presided.

While the École du Meuble was a crucial training ground for Quebec designers of furniture and later industrial designers, Gauvreau's role as a promoter of design and handicrafts along with small businesses as important components of Quebec's economic strategy is equally important. During the 192os and 1930s, Quebec relied heavily on French sources for the development of its decorative arts and architecture, but there was less interest in the American model of production for mass consumption.

Although the province had strong industries— pulp and paper mills and chemical processing plants among them—these provided natural resources rather than finished goods for the market. One exception was Joseph-Armand Bombardier's design and production of snowmobiles, which developed into an enterprise of considerable size during World War II and expanded rapidly after that. Nonetheless, the government's interest in small business development and its espousal of craftsmanship as important for the province's economic development resulted in most industrialized enterprises such as railroad, automobile, and airplane manufacturing emerging in other parts of Canada, where the proclivity to create an industrial economy was more strongly espoused.

## The national handicraft movement

The writings and work of William Morris were known among academics, artists, and art patrons in Toronto and Montreal. In Toronto, the architect Eden Smith (1858– 1949), who had emigrated to Canada from England in the late 188os, designed many buildings——primarily private residences but also several churches—in the Arts and Crafts style. George A. Reid (1860–1947), an academic narrative painter and muralist who became the first principal of the Ontario College of Art in 1912, also espoused Morris's philosophy, particularly his aim to unite the fine and applied arts. In 1903, Reid and others founded the Arts and Crafts Society of Canada. The society held its first applied arts exhibition in 1904. Changing its name the following year to the Canadian Society of Applied Art, it held a few more exhibitions until its demise around 1912, by which time the principal members had gone on to other activities. The society's definition of applied art centered on the crafts, ranging widely from metalwork, pottery, furniture and woodcarving to leatherwork, bookbinding, weaving and basketry.

Although not directly inspired by the Arts and Crafts movement, the Guild of All Arts, founded by Herbert Spencer Clark (1903-1986), an electrical engineer and social democrat, and his wife Rose Clark (dates unconfirmed) in the early 193os, sought to become a craft community along the lines of Charles

Robert Ashbee's Guild of Handicraft, where craftsmen not only worked together but also shared a communal life. A directly acknowledged model was Roycroft, an Arts and Crafts community in East Aurora, NY, that Elbert Hubbard founded in 1895 (see Chapter 13). The Clarks were also influenced by the ideas of Americans Arthur Nash and his pupil William Hapgood, both advocates of worker ownership and shared management. On property owned by Rose Clark's family, the Clarks started workshops that produced handloom weaving, printed fabric, wrought iron, pewter, cabinetry, furniture, and other wooden objects. They brought over most of their master craftsmen from Europe. In 1934, the Guild of All Arts opened a craft shop on the premises and three years later another in downtown Toronto. By the time the community ceased to function around 1947, the Clarks had built up a sizeable business of manufacturing and selling handlooms for which they had obtained the patent in Britain. They also maintained their woodworking enterprise after the war, although they moved on to other projects that had nothing to do with their ambitions of the 1930s.

The organization that most actively promoted Canadian handicrafts for many years was the Canadian Handicrafts Guild that two women in Montreal, Alice Peck (dates unconfirmed) and Mary Phillips (1856– 1937), founded in 1905. An early advocate of arts and crafts education for women, Phillips was co-principal in 1892 of the Victoria School of Art in Montreal, where women and children were taught design, china painting, and ceramics. Three years later she became head of her own School of Applied Art and Design, whose curriculum was intended to train students to work as designers for architects and manufacturers. It was active for just under a decade.

Phillips and most likely Alice Peck were founding members of the Montreal branch of the Women's Art Association of Canada (WAAC) in 1894. From its inception, the WAAC put considerable emphasis on crafts and applied design through workshops and lectures including talks on the British Aesthetic Movement and Arts and Crafts artists—Dante Gabriel Rosetti, Edward Burne-Jones, William Morris, and Walter Crane. It also initiated a series of exhibitions, and opened a sales venue, called simply Our Handicraft Shop.

After its founding, the Canadian Handicraft Guild, which began as and remained a women's organization, took over the shop and ran it for many years. The guild also launched an annual exhibition, which was held regularly in Montreal. Through the energetic promotion of Peck and Phillips, the Canadian Craft Guild played a central role in the fostering, exhibition, and marketing of crafts in Canada. Guild women sought pieces from craftspersons around the country and promoted them through the organization's exhibitions and sales gallery.

The guild's strong social agenda influenced its attitude towards craft production, emphasizing its multicultural aspects and recognizing the work of isolated, disabled, and immigrant groups. Of special interest were the crafts of Canada's Indian population. The guild also supported independent craftsmen such as snowshoe makers, blacksmiths, and chair caners. Besides the annual exhibitions, guild members organized many other exhibits of an educational nature, all of which recognized and promoted the crafts and craftspeople.

The guild played its part in World War I by launching a "Made in Canada" campaign in 1915. It held several competitions for Canadian toys to offset the absence of toys from Germany due to the war. The guild also promoted Canadian crafts abroad, receiving a Certificate of Honor for its exhibit at the 1924 British Empire Exhibition at Wembley. Surprisingly, Quebec officials did not include the guild in their plans for a handicraft revival at the end of the 192os, perhaps due to male chauvinism or else a desire to maintain their initiative as a Francophone project.

Besides the active crafts promotion of the Canadian Craft Guild, numerous Canadian provinces recognized the crafts as a means to create jobs and generate wealth. This occurred largely in provinces where industry had not developed or was slow to take hold, especially the Maritime Provinces—New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island along with Newfoundland and Labrador. In 1907, the Grenfell Mission—founded by Dr. William Grenfell, a physician dedicated to improving the lives of people in Newfoundland and Labrador—established an industrial department to develop cottage industries, among them the production of fur coats and boots and rugs. In the early 193os, the mission constructed a large industrial center to train local people in specific craft techniques, an activity that helped to offset the seasonal work of fishing, hunting, and lumbering. Another organization that promoted craft production in the region was the Newfoundland Outport Nursing and Industrial Association (NONIA), which was supported by the wife of the Governor of Newfoundland. Among its projects was a plan that would enable women in fishing communities to knit and weave in their homes and then sell their products at a retail store in St. John's. Over time, the women developed a variety of handknitted garments, many of which were woven on looms that the fishermen made.

In 1943, the Nova Scotia Department of Trade and Industry inaugurated a handicrafts program, providing government instructors to teach weaving, spinning, leather tooling, woodcarving, and jewelry making. A Handicraft Center was built, though the government did not purchase the final products, attempting instead to connect the craftsmen with potential customers. One form of promotion was the publication of Handicrafts, a bulletin that discussed handicrafts on all levels from local to international.

During the Depression, handicrafts became a means of survival for thousands of families in Nova Scotia. One industry that had roots in the late 19th century was the design and production of pressed glassware—drinking glasses, containers, and also household utensils. Of the numerous glass factories founded in the 19th century, the most successful was the Humphrey Glass Company, which specialized in whiskey flasks, medicine bottles, lamps, glass rolling pins, and fruit jars. In 19o8, the factory was turning out 25,ooo pieces of glass a day. As the company expanded, it brought in glass blowers from Europe and the United States and began to produce more artistic objects such as pressed glass plates. The factory ceased operations in 192o when the rates of natural gas, on which it depended, rose.

In New Brunswick, the Department of Education set up a youth training project in 1937 to introduce courses for young people in crafts that had been declining. Courses including carpentry, weaving, crocheting, needlepoint, and rug making were taught in numerous communities. During a two-year period, more than 2,ooo girls participated, while many boys were trained in furniture making, using local birch and maple wood.

Handicraft guilds and programs were also instituted in other provinces, but the economic consequences of such activities seemed particularly dramatic in the north-east, where harsh weather conditions, remote locations, and existing seasonal work deterred the establishment of industrial enterprises.

Most craftspeople in Canada during the interwar years were not widely known, but a few of them established enterprises that brought them recognition. A number were immigrants from Scandinavia, where there was a long tradition of craft production. Håkon Rudolph “Rudy"” Renzius (1899-1968) was a Swedish metalsmith who trained with his father in Malmö and came to Toronto in 193o. He set up a studio and showroom, working primarily in pewter rather than silver. He designed various products for the home mirrors, candlesticks and candelabra, coffee and tea sets, cocktail shakers and cups, trays, vases—and jewelry as well. Although he trained several metalsmiths whose designs were influenced by modern forms, his own designs had traditional elements such as ornate handles and curved shapes. In 1936, Renzius began