teaching manual crafts at Pickering College near the town of Newmarket. Among the younger metalsmiths whose careers he influenced were Andrew Fussell (dates unconfirmed), who came to Toronto from Britain in 1926, Douglas Boyd (1901-1972), and Harold Stacey (1911–1979).

In New Brunswick, two Danish immigrants, Kjeld (1900-1963) and Erica Deichmann (dates unconfirmed), set up the Dykelands Pottery in 1934. Both trained in Denmark and drew on a Scandinavian sensibility for their designs. They used a mix of local clay from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, while experimenting with novel shapes, subtle glazes, unusual textures, and joyful surface painting. Their forms were simple, reflecting the modern tendency to avoid decoration, and the objects were practical—plates, jugs, vases, bowls, lamp bases, and the like—although they produced some ceramic sculptures and small figurines as well. The Deichmanns were pioneers among studio potters in Canada. Though they initially sold their products from their own studio in New Brunswick, by 1940 they were sending their ceramics to shops outside the province.

Another Danish immigrant, Karen Bulow (1899– 1982), settled in Montreal in 1929 and soon developed a large clientele for the woven objects she created at different scales ranging from scarves, bags, and men's ties—which were extremely popular—to rugs and hangings for individual homes, and larger commissions for public spaces such as the Bank of Nova Scotia headquarters in Montreal. Bulow was known for her vibrant color sense, which characterized all of her designs. She was the founder of Canada Homespuns, considered by some to have been the first professional weaving studio in Canada, employing up to 70 weavers, some of whom worked from home. Products included drapery fabric, which was extremely popular with interior decorators in Montreal and Toronto, ties and other small items, woven rugs, and wall hangings. Bulow collaborated with leading interior decorators such as Marcel Parizeau in Montreal and also directed a weaving school, where some of Canada's top weavers were trained. Although she worked in Montreal, Bulow did not share either the Quebec government's or Jean-Marie Gauvreau's nationalistic view of the crafts as worthy of recognition because they were inherent in a region's cultural tradition. She referenced the craft philosophy of Scandinavia rather than the work of French decorators or Quebec farmwomen and appeared to differ from the Canadian Crafts Guild in her espousal of craft as a cultivated cultural practice rather than an activity for amateurs.

## Farm equipment

Three companies came to dominate the farm implement market in the period before World War II: Massey-Harris, International Harvester, and the Cockshutt Plow Company. Following the establishment of its Canadian subsidiary in 1903, International Harvester, a leading American farm implement firm, became a serious competitor with Massey-Harris. In 191I it purchased the Clatham Wagon Plant, where it began to manufacture wagons to supplement its line of farm implements, but a decade later it started to use the plant for the manufacture of trucks, which became one of its major products.

The Cockshutt Plow Company was small, and originally sold most of its plows to Massey-Harris until the larger firm acquired the Verity Plow Company and began to produce plows of its own. Cockshutt expanded its product line and made an arrangement with an American company that produced harvesting equipment to sell that company's products in Canada. Cockshutt subsequently acquired two Canadian carriage companies, thus enabling it to sell a full line of products to farmers in western Canada, where it experienced a large increase in business that was complemented by expanded sales abroad. Nonetheless, the company failed to produce a range of products that derived from the trend towards mechanization in agriculture—particularly gas-powered equipment— although it retained a strong position in the production