a contract to provide Vickers Viking flying boats to the Canadian Air Force. The company produced some planes of its own design and built others under license. Canadian Vickers was also interested in small “bush planes" and produced one, the Vickers Vedette, that went into production in 1926.

In 1938, Canada Car and Foundry hired Elsie McGill (1905–1980) as its Chief Aeronautical Engineer. She was the first woman anywhere to hold such a position. Her principal project was the Maple Leaf II, a new training aircraft that was recognized for its highaltitude performance. McGill adapted several elements from an earlier training aircraft that the company had produced, but created an essentially new design. Though the plane was not adopted by the Canadian Air Force, which sought a more challenging trainer, a number were produced in Mexico. There its special properties were appropriate for the many different airfields where it operated.

In 1937, the Canadian parliament created Trans-Canada Airlines, the country's first passenger airline. A subsidiary of Canadian National Railways, it was launched with two passenger planes. A strong supporter of the airline's formation was C. D. Howe, the grain elevator magnate whom Prime Minister William Mackenzie King had appointed Minister of Railways and Canals in 1935. Howe kept the airline in his ministerial portfolio and remained active in its expansion during the post-war years.

## Exhibiting design

The principal domestic site for the display of new Canadian inventions and manufactured products such as furniture and appliances, as well as many other things, was the Canadian National Exhibition, whose annual displays in Toronto were initiated in 1879, when it was christened the Toronto Industrial Exhibition. The name was changed to its current one in 1912.

Canadian displays and pavilions in international exhibitions before World War II were undistinguished. As a British colony, Canada exhibited at the 1851 exhibition in London and at others in the 19th century. As a nation with strong political ties to Britain, Canada took part in the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley in 1924. The country did not participate in the 1925 Paris Exposition des Arts Décoratifs, but then as a sovereign state following the 1931 Statute of Westminster, it had its own pavilions at the 1937 World's Fair in Paris and the 1939 Fair in New York. At the Paris fair, the Canadian Pavilion, designed by the Canadian government Exhibition Commission in London, looked like a miniature version of a concrete grain elevator and was attached to the building that housed the United Kingdom's display. However, the furniture and applied arts sector had put its best forward to produce an exhibit of modern home furnishings that was displayed inside.

For the 1939 New York World's Fair, Canada had a more respectable building that was freestanding and contained a more aggressively designed presentation of Canadian life and resources. W. F. Williams (dates unconfirmed) designed the pavilion in a style that might tentatively be called modernist, retaining as it did four columns at the entrance and possessing heavy rectilinear mass. The exhibits were supervised by James Crockart (1885–1974), who worked primarily as a commercial artist, painter, and etcher in Montreal. The focus was on a display of panoramas, animated maps, dioramas, and photomontages that were intended to attract American tourists and businessmen to Canada. Perhaps reflecting Crockart's background as an etcher, a large illuminated map painted on burnished copper depicted aviation routes, mounted police outposts, grain fields, and mining areas. There was little to show of manufactured products.

A secondary hall featured natural resources and primary industries——mining, agriculture, forestry, and the like. Critics complained that the exhibits were outdated and not adequately representative of contemporary Canada. Most significant is the fact that, despite an increasingly active manufacturing sector that had produced significant breakthroughs in