farm implements, railroad engines, radios, and aircraft design, Canada, as it represented itself in New York, was still unable to project a national identity that emphasized its potential as a competitive manufacturing power, rather than a repository of primary resources.

## Graphic Design

## Advertising

produced posters, sometimes on their own initiative and other times through commissions. The uneven quality of these efforts prompted the government to set up the War Poster Service, while existing federal agencies also created posters for different purposes.

By 19oo, advertising agencies could find numerous clients for their services among the many Canadian companies that made packaged food, clothing, cigarettes, and beverages. Services such as insurance were promoted as well. Newspapers and magazines were the principal outlets for ads, although posters and billboards were used to some degree. Products from abroad such as chewing gum and appliances were also widely advertised, some with ads that advertising agencies in the United States produced. Anson McKim (1855-1917) founded Canada's first advertising agency in 1889. Initially known as A. McKim and Company, it was located in Montreal. More than 2o years later, François-Émile Fontaine (dates unconfirmed) founded the Canadian Advertising Agency Ltd in the same city.

Initially, ad layouts were left to newspaper compositors who had no experience with designing appealing ad copy. As a result, many ads were poorly done with too much type and too many typeface variations. Consequently advertising agencies began to insist on having the ads set independently and delivering them as electrotypes—metal plates that contained the entire ad. This made possible national campaigns with the same ads rather than different layouts created by local compositors. Following the electrotype was the stereotype, a papier mâché mold from which a printing plate could be cast.

Advertising agencies were active during World War I, helping with recruiting, promoting investments in war bonds, encouraging greater production, and providing guidance for citizen participation in the war effort. Commercial art studios and printing plants

Among the many posters for both English- and French-speaking audiences were a few that stood out for the quality of their artwork. One of the strongest was by a Montreal architect, Percy E. Nobbs (1875–1954). A recruiting poster, it depicted a Canadian soldier about to thrust a bayonet through a black eagle, which represented Germany. Another World War I poster artist was Arthur Hider (1879-1952), whose parents had brought him to Canada from England in the early 187os. Hider was known as one of Canada's best realist painters who had earlier distinguished himself as a war artist with his drawings and paintings of the Boer War. Several of his recruiting posters for World War I, particularly one addressed to potential French-Canadian recruits, showed a high quality of draftsmanship although they lacked overall design. Other World War I poster artists included Arthur Keelor (dates unconfirmed) and Malcom Gibson (dates unconfirmed).

Following World War I, posters were used sparingly for product advertising, being supplanted by billboards that signified the growing influence of the automobile. Neither product posters nor billboards broke any new ground during the interwar years. Billboards for tobacco, biscuits, and beer represented the product with a package or bottle. These objects were inserted into conventional narrative scenes of people smoking, eating, or drinking. In this sense, the advertising followed the lead of American advertising agencies whose billboards lined that nation's highways. A billboard illustration by Arthur Hider for Black Horse Ale depicted several "connoisseurs" admiring a painting of a black horse, clearly intended as a surrogate for a bottle of the eponymous ale. Among the most iconic billboard images were American illustrator James C. Leyendecker's depictions of Arrow Collar men, transposed to a Canadian setting. A rare exception