to the American illustrative style were the designs of Raoul Bonin (1904-1949), a French-Canadian designer who worked briefly with A. M. Cassandre in Paris in the early 193os. Bonin was perhaps the first graphic designer in Canada to adopt a conceptual approach to poster design.

## Commercial art and book design

The distinction between fine art and commercial art in 19th-century Canada was blurred as it continued to be in the years that followed. In Toronto, Canada's leading painters—members of the Group of Seven, which was active between 192o and 1933, and whose members sought to replace the nation's tradition of academic landscape painting with a more expressive modern style—initially worked as commercial artists for Grip Ltd, a photoengraving house in Toronto that also functioned as a commercial art studio (see Chapter 14). The presence of so many painters on the staff was due to the art director A. H. Robson (dates unconfirmed), who believed that fine artists were particularly well qualified for commercial work. This was sensible, given that most of the jobs at the time involved drawing, whether illustration or lettering, or the technical skill of engraving.

One of the first artists to join Grip Ltd was J. E. H. MacDonald (1873-1932), subsequently a Group of Seven painter, who arrived in 1895, having previously worked for the Toronto Lithographing Company. MacDonald, who had earlier studied at the Central Ontario School of Art, remained with Grip Ltd until 1903, when he went to London. There he worked for the Carlton Studio, a commercial art firm and advertising agency that was started in 1902 by several Canadian artists. Four years later he returned to Toronto, where he rejoined Grip Ltd as supervisor of the design department. He stayed until 1911, when he left to become a freelance designer and to concentrate on his painting.

Other members of the Group of Seven who worked for Grip Ltd were Franz Johnston (1888–1949),

Franklin Carmichael (1890-1945), Frederick Varley (1881–1969), and Arthur Lismer (1885–1969). Lismer had his own publicity studio in Sheffield, England, before he emigrated to Canada. The painters Tom Thompson (1877–1917), Tom McLean (1881–1951), who went on to head the art department at Brigdens Ltd in Winnipeg, William Broadhead (1888–1960), and Neil McKechnie (dates unconfirmed) also worked for Grip Ltd at various times.

In 1912, A. H. Robson, Grip Ltd's art director, left to work for a competitor, Rous and Mann, a printing firm that valued high-quality production and had been established only three years earlier.

Following Robson to Rous and Mann were four of the Grip Ltd artists, Franklin Carmichael, Tom Thomson, Arthur Lismer, and Fred Varley. They were joined by Alfred Casson (1898–1992), who became a Group of Seven artist when Franz Johnston left in 1921. In 1927, Casson left Rous and Mann to become the art director of Sampson Matthews, a printing firm that introduced serigraphy or screen-printing to Canada.

Tom McLean (1881-1951) went on to head the art department at Brigden's Ltd in Winnipeg, which opened in 1913. A branch of the established Toronto engraving firm that bore the same name, it was similar in many ways to Grip Ltd. Brigden's also employed artists including Charles Comfort (1900-1994), who later founded a successful commercial art studio with Will Ogilvie (dates unconfirmed) in Toronto during the 1930s; Philip Surrey (1910–1990); William Winter (1909-1995), who subsequently became a partner in a small Toronto publicity agency and a well-known illustrator; Fritz Brandtner (1896–1969), a German émigré who worked as a designer and lettering artist for Brigden's; and Eric Bergman (1893–1958), a wood engraver who also emigrated from Germany. At Brigden's, Bergman did the wood engravings for the Eaton's Department Store catalogs. The difference between the artists who worked for Brigden's and those on the staff at Grip Ltd was that the Brigden's artists were interested in a more cosmopolitan modernism than the Group of Seven artists in Toronto, whose emphasis was on painting nationalistic landscapes.

Not only did some of the Grip Ltd artists develop into major Canadian painters, but a number of them also went on to become prominent art educators. Before the Group of Seven formed, Arthur Lismer had served as principal of the Victoria School of Art and Design in Halifax between 1916 and 1919. Between 1920 and 1924, Franz Johnston was head of the Winnipeg School of Art and Art Gallery, leading a school that had been founded only seven years earlier, while Fred Varley went to the new Vancouver School of Decorative and Applied Arts in 1926, remaining there for ten years as Head of Drawing, Painting, and Composition.

J. E. H. MacDonald, the senior member of the Group of Seven artists, joined the Department of Design and Applied Art at the Ontario College of Art in 1921, subsequently becoming head of the department, then principal of the school in 1929, a position he held until his death in 1932. He became involved with commercial art education in 19o9 when he designed the first of a series of booklets for students enrolled in the Commercial Design course at the Shaw Correspondence School in Toronto. He was made supervisor of the Shaw school's Department of Commercial Design the following year and continued in the position for some years after that.

Besides painting and teaching, MacDonald was active as a freelance commercial artist from the time he left Grip Ltd until he died. He was adept as an illustrator, calligrapher, and layout artist. The range of his clients was extensive and his work included booklets, brochures, programs, book title pages and jackets, lettering, vignettes, bookplates, magazine covers, borders and headpieces, newspaper ads, letterheads, and the occasional poster, along with memorial tablets and plaques, and hand-lettered certificates.

MacDonald worked in a figurative illustrative style and his lettering was based primarily on traditional serif and script faces. He designed book title pages for the Toronto publishers McClelland and Stewart and the Ryerson Press, mainly in the Arts and Crafts manner, with decorated borders, hand lettering, and line drawings. Among the national magazines for which he worked were Maclean's, the Canadian Magazine, the Canadian Forum, and the Canadian Courier. For the latter publication, he designed numerous vignettes, section mastheads, and decorative borders.

MacDonald's son, Thoreau (1905–1989), was also a commercial artist, who specialized in book design and illustration. Color blind, he was noted for his black and white pen and ink drawings. Like his father, he was skilled at lettering as well as drawing and he admired earlier and contemporary British and American lettering artists and typographers such as Edward Johnston, Eric Gill, William Addison Dwiggins, and Fred Goudy.

Thoreau MacDonald was perhaps Canada's leading book designer and illustrator during the period from the 192os to the 1940s. Like his father, he designed covers and title pages and did illustrations for the Toronto publishers McClelland and Stewart and the Ryerson Press, as well as other firms such as J. M. Dent and Macmillan. The editor of the Ryerson Press, Lorne Pearce (1890-1961), championed Canadian writers and had high standards for book design, which were exemplified by Thoreau MacDonald's title pages with their elegant lettering and illustrative black and white vignettes. He is well known for his illustrations of Louis Hémon's Maria Chapdelaine, a popular novel about French-Canadian farın life.

In 1933, Thoreau MacDonald launched his own imprint, the Woodchuck Press, whose books were important examples of the Canadian private press movement. Besides his work in book publishing, he also designed numerous exhibition catalogs and was affiliated with the Canadian Forum, a progressive political and cultural magazine that was founded in 192o. He was an early contributor of drawings and linocuts to the magazine before serving as its art director throughout most of the 192os and the early 193os, during which time he illustrated most of the covers as well as continuing to provide other artwork.