## Railway publicity campaigns

When William Van Horne retired as president of the Canadian Pacific Railroad in 1899, he was succeeded by Thomas Shaughnessy, whom Van Horne had initially brought with him from the United States. Whereas Van Horne was a visionary who was willing to move mountains to lay down the track for a new route, Shaughnessy was a careful administrator who, nonetheless, presided over the greatest expansion in the railroad's history thus far.

In 1911, Shaughnessy created a separate publicity branch that was headquartered in Montreal, maintaining as its head George Ham (dates unconfirmed), whom Van Horne had previously appointed to that position. One function of the branch was the preparation of exhibits. Ham was assisted in this by John Murray Gibbon (1875–1952), a Scottish writer who joined the CPR in London. To the Canadian Pacific Pavilion designed for London's White City exhibition, which was topped by four moose guarding a globe, Gibbon added the slogan, "Canadian Pacific Spans the World." He was also instrumental in arranging the railroad's pavilion at San Francisco's Pan-Pacific Exhibition in 1915. Designed by Beaux Arts-trained American architect Frances Swales (1878–1962), who had also done the White City pavilion, it was a pastiche of elements from different historic periods.

In 1913, Gibbon came to Canada and replaced Ham as the head of advertising to which was added the responsibility for pubic relations. One of his first actions was to include French-language material in the company's advertising program; consequently brochures, pamphlets, and posters that had previously been published only in English were now translated into French as well. Gibbon also had a strong interest in folk art and literature and was responsible for the many folk festivals such as the Highland Gathering, Banff Indian Days, and the Great West Canadian Festivals of folksong, folk dance, and handicrafts that were held at Canadian Pacific hotels and became destinations for railroad travelers.

During the 192os, Gibbon greatly expanded the number of artists who created posters and other publicity material for the CPR. He brought Alfred Crocker Leighton (19o1-1965), a young but already prominent English artist, to Canada and invited him to sketch and paint at sites along the CPR line. Leighton was taken with the majesty of Canada's mountains and produced a number of paintings that were adopted for posters and brochures. During several subsequent visits, he painted sites in other parts of Canada before deciding to settle there. For a brief period, Leighton served as head of the Alberta College of Art, and also established a visual arts program at the Banff School of Fine Arts. By 1938 he had resigned his teaching positions to dedicate himself full-time to painting.

From the time the CPR began offering roundthe-world and transpacific cruises in the 189os, it had developed a separate advertising strategy for its maritime passenger and shipping services. Besides the cruises, the company also promoted ship travel for emigrants to Canada, helping them to acquire farms in the bargain. During World War I, the CPR amalgamated two shipping lines it owned into one, which it called Canadian Pacific Ocean Services (CPOS), a name that was changed to Canadian Pacific Steamships Ltd in 1921.

During the 192os, C. W. Stokes (dates unconfirmed), the CPR's London director of publicity, recruited a number of British painters to create posters for the steamship division. These included Bernard Gribble (1873-1962), Odin Rosenvinge (1880–1957), Leonard Richmond (1889-1965), Kenneth Shoesmith (1890-1939), Harry Hudson Rodmell (1896–1984), and Norman Wilkinson (1878–1971). Shoesmith, Rodmell, and Wilkinson were also established commercial artists. Rodmell designed posters for various shipping lines, while Wilkinson's poster clients included some of Britain's regional railroads. C. W. Stokes also commissioned designs from British graphic designer Tom Purvis (1888–1959), whose posters for the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) and the London tailor

Austin Reed did much to create modern images for those organizations.

Purvis notwithstanding, most artists hired by the CPR specialized in marine art and were commissioned to provide paintings of Canadian Pacific ships that could be adapted for lithographic posters with some uninspiring text added. These may be contrasted with the dramatic designerly icons that A. M. Cassandre and other modern poster designers created for rival steamship companies in Europe. In addition to posters, the CPR published lavish pamphlets with no expense spared to promote its cruises during the 192os. Gold and silver leaf enriched the multi-hued pamphlets whose scenes of exotic destinations were depicted by talented illustrators.

By contrast with the CPR posters produced in London during the 192os, only a small number of lithographic posters were created in Canada during that decade. Most of the artists remain unknown, although one can mention Canadian painters Gordon Fraser Gillespie (1891–1965), Hal Ross Perrigard (1891–1960), and Charles J. Greenwood (1893-1965), along with the American painter and graphic artist Reinhold H. Palenske (1884-1954). Some of these artists illustrated promotional materials as well.

A new phase of CPR poster production began in 1932 when the company opened a silkscreen printing shop in Montreal's Windsor Station. Among the reasons for adopting silkscreen were its low cost and the rapidity of production. The art director of the studio was Ernest W. Scraggier (dates unconfirmed), who was also assistant director of the Exhibits Branch, which supervised the poster production. Compared to the extensive use of British artists in the prior decade, the artists who created posters for the CPR in the 193os were for the most part Canadian. The visual emphasis was on modern design rather than traditional painting, and themes shifted from the primacy of landscapes and scenic views to images of active men and women enjoying the outdoors. Suave couples were also depicted as guests at the CPR's luxury hotels or on its cruise ships. Vigorous skiers were shown racing down Quebec's snowy slopes. The overall style of the silk-screened posters was more designerly than the earlier lithographed ones. The most active artist during the 193os was Norman Fraser (dates unconfirmed), who also created numerous designs that consisted entirely of type and lettering. Fraser is especially well known for his poster that promoted travel on the Canadian Pacific to the 1933 Century of Progress exhibition in Chicago.

The stylistic emphasis was on flat colors and dramatic compositions that featured human activity. Notable exceptions were the posters by Tom Hall (1885-d.o.d. unconfirmed), a wildlife painter and commercial artist, whose images promoted big game hunting featuring moose, deer, and grizzly bears. Two CPR poster artists who were strongly influenced by modern European advertising posters were Peter Ewart (1918–2001) and Roger Couillard (1910-1999), possibly the only French-Canadian to work for the CPR in those years. Ewart had been exposed to the work of A. M. Cassandre, Josef Binder, E. McKnight Kauffer, and Tom Purvis while studying at the Commercial Illustration Studio in New York. Not only did his posters emphasize the flat color of serigraphy, but he also eliminated unnecessary detail in order to create engaging compositions as is evident in a poster that promoted skiing in the Canadian Rockies (Plate 59).

Couillard had his own Montreal design office, Studio Coutrey, where he not only produced posters for the CPR but also for the city of Montreal and the province of Quebec. Unlike Ewart, Couillard created occasional posters that eschewed illustration for more conceptual images as Cassandre had done in many of his designs. Possibly he encountered this approach in the posters of his fellow Quebecois Raoul Bonin. Couillard's poster See Europe Next, which featured a map of Western Europe inside a life preserver with a curved red arrow pointing to the map, initially won a poster competition before the CPR published it in 1939. Others who designed modern posters for the CPR during the 193os were James Crockart, the