for san serif type from the principles of the New Typography that Moholy-Nagy had enunciated in the 1923 Bauhaus catalog and the typographer Jan Tschichold had begun to codify in a special issue of the German printing magazine Typographische Mitteilungen in October 1925. Bayer also adopted the argument of Dr. Walter Portsmann, an engineer who argued in his book Sprach und Schrift (Speech and Writing) of 1920 that capital letters were inefficient. Bayer began to use "kleinschreibung" or writing with small letters, to support the argument for efficiency in communication that Moholy-Nagy had also promoted in his Bauhaus catalog essay of 1923.

Bayer's interest in efficiency was the basis for his design of an alphabet he called "universal," which had no capital letters. In the spirit of modernity, Bayer rejected the tradition of roman alphabets and instead constructed his own letters from several basic elements, notably circles and arcs (Fig. 21.19). While this created some unity between letters based on similar shapes, it also left other letters outside the system, hence the alphabet lacked the consistency that was a traditional hallmark of typographic quality.

Bayer's alphabet was not picked up by a type foundry and thus it served a polemical aim rather than a functional one. Others at the Bauhaus also experimented with modular alphabets. Joseph Albers created his "kombinationschrift" (combination writing), which was based on ten modular shapes. It was an interesting experiment but had no practical application since a typesetter would have had to build letters out of modular elements rather than use already formed letters to compose lines of type.

Before the Bauhaus moved to Dessau, Gropius had asked Moholy-Nagy to co-edit a series of Bauhaus books that would publicize work being done at the Bauhaus, present the ideas of the Bauhaus teachers, and sum up the major modern movements in art and architecture. The first books appeared in 1925 and by 1929, when the series ended, 14 books had been published, although about so were planned. The published books included Paul Klee's Pedagogical Sketchbook, Wassily Kandinsky's Point and Line to Plane, Kazimir Malevich's The Non-Objective World, and Moholy-Nagy's Painting Photography Film. Moholy-Nagy designed most of the books according to the principles of the New Typography that he had promoted. He organized the covers with heavy geometric elements and used photographs or photograms (cameraless photographs) in some instances. Moholy drew his design aesthetic from his own Constructivist paintings and though he was somewhat heavy handed in his designs, the Bauhaus books contrasted sharply with the conventions of book design, especially the design of covers, that prevailed in Germany at the time. The Bauhaus books helped to publicize the school widely as did the photographs of Bauhaus projects and school life that circulated widely in articles and promotional literature. Many of these photographs were taken by Moholy's first wife Lucia, who was actively documenting events at the school while he taught there.

In early 1928, Gropius decided to resign, most likely because he wanted to devote time to his architectural practice but also because he had consumed a great deal of energy defending the school against numerous critics. However, he was leaving the Bauhaus in a strong position. The facilities were excellent and the school had begun to increase its contacts with industry as was originally intended. Bayer, Moholy-Nagy, and Breuer decided to resign at the same time, which left the school with a considerable gap to fill.

## The Meyer years

The new director was Hannes Meyer, the Swiss architect whom Gropius hired in 1927 to head up the first architecture department. Meyer could not have been more different from Gropius. Politically, he was considerably to the left of Gropius's moderate socialism and architecturally he promoted a rational approach to building that was based more on sociological and economic research than on design. Under Meyer, the architecture department supported a major project of