and other architectural applications along with an array of ceramicware, cigarette boxes, ash trays, table mats, textiles, and beach tiles that one might well argue extracted the motifs from their original cultural context and turned them into commercial icons.

## Graphic design

## Advertising

Harry Weston (dates unconfirmed), who started the Weston Company, an advertising studio, in 19o1, was a jack-of-all-trades. He painted in oils and watercolors, made prints, created posters, and drew cartoons. His intent in opening his studio was to furnish artwork for clients as well as to sell advertising space. He came to Sydney from Tasmania and then Melbourne, where he had joined the cooperative poster studio formed by Blamire Young. His early clients included Dunlop Rubber and Boomerang Brandy.

After he found a business partner in 1904, Weston devoted himself entirely to graphic art, producing large numbers of posters and advertisements as well as magazine covers and book illustrations. He did not have a distinctive stylistic approach. Some ads consisted of anecdotal cartoons, while others featured more sober illustrations as in an advertisement for Franz Josef Lager of 1911, which depicted a wealthy young sportsman accepting a bottle of the lager from an older waiter in formal serving attire. Though intended to denote an Australian setting, the image recalls posters by Ludwig Hohlwein in Germany and the American J. C. Leyendecker, who by this time had already done numerous advertisements for various men's clothing companies that showed self-assured wealthy young men.

In Melbourne, Hugh Paton (1871–1951), who referred to himself as an "advertect," opened the Paton Advertising Service in 1904. At the time, businesses tended to create their own advertisements, which were generally dull and consisted primarily of text. Paton adopted the system that had already been established in Britain and the United States of preparing ads for clients and then placing them in publications. His ads featured illustrations, which he produced initially with woodblocks but then with photography as soon as process engraving made printing photographs possible. Paton's agency expanded and he led the way in creating trade associations like the Victorian Institute of Advertising to legitimize his profession.

Paton may be remembered more for developing and defining the role and function of advertising agencies than for any particular projects or campaigns. The agency that more than any other created memorable artistic ads in the early years of Australian advertising was Smith & Julius Studios, which Sydney Ure Smith (1887–1949) and Harry Julius (1885-1938) founded in 1906. Both men had studied at the art school set up by the prominent artist and teacher Julian Ashton in Sydney. There, Ashton taught both commercial and ine art.

Smith and Julius were excellent draftsmen and consequently much of their studio's early work consisted of black and white drawings, either illustrations for articles and stories in newspapers or advertisements for large department stores. By 1912, the firm had taken on a partner to manage the business, enabling the two founders to concentrate on their art. Over time, the agency was not only known for the quality of its work but also for the use of the most advanced printing technology.

By 1917, Smith and Julius had built a talented staff of trained artists whose commercial work, they believed, would also leave them time for their own endeavors. A number of the artists had also studied with Julian Ashton and went on to become major figures in the art world. There was, in fact, a close connection between the Julian Ashton School of Art, Smith & Julius Studios, and the Society of Artists in which both Ashton and Smith were active.

Smith & Julius clients included furniture companies, department stores, and some other large businesses, among them the Australian General Electric Company and Barnes Linseed Oil. Many of the advertisements the agency did for these clients appeared after 1916 in the magazine Art in Australia, which Sydney Ure Smith founded. Due to his interest in printing technology, the firm was able to print many of its ads in four colors.

The agency's ads followed a strict division between the image and the text, with the restrained layouts deriving more from book design than bold advertising rhetoric. For several ads the studio created to promote its own services, the decorative floral borders around the images and their placement in relation to the columns of text suggest a strong infuence of the Arts and Crafts movement.

Among the major artists on the Smith & Julius staff were Lloyd Rees (1895-1988), who built a reputation as a landscape painter; Roland Wakelin (1887-1971), a founder of Sydney's modern art movement; and Percy Leason (1889-1959), a skilled draftsman who was a designer of posters and a book illustrator before he became Smith & Julius's chief designer. Subsequently, Leason contributed cartoons to several humor magazines, notably his drawings of Wiregrass, a mythical Australian town.

Other artists who worked for Smith and Julius included J. B. Godson (1882–1957), George Lawrence (c. 1901-1981), Rema Becke (dates unconfirmed), James Muir Auld (1879-1942), Adrian Feint, John Passmore (1904-1984), Albert Collins (dates unconfirmed), and Alek Sass (1877-1922). The firm also had a separate typography department with several employees including the typographers Perce Green (1889-1972), who did the layouts for most of the advertisements, and Percy Pickles (dates unconfirmed), a specialist in the design of decorative borders. They were later joined by a lettering man, W. E. Roberts (dates unconfirmed), who was considered the best in Sydney.

By 1924, Sydney Smith had ceased involvement with the advertising studio in order to focus on a number of publishing ventures he had initiated. Harry Julius and the artist Albert Collins then ran the business until it merged in 1934 with the Catts Patterson

Advertising Agency, which by 192o had become the largest and most comprehensive agency in Australia. Julius later pursued a career in animation, having created the first Australian animated film in 1912, after which he established Australia's first studio for the production of animated advertising films.

A leading competitor with Smith & Julius in Sydney was Jones & Jardine, which was established in 1905, with the illustrator Walter Jardine (1884-1970) as one of its principals. Jardine was a talented artist, known for his line and brush drawings, who had spent years working for the Australian Star, where he achieved wide recognition for his black and white illustrations. Jones & Jardine had built up a staff of about 2o artists and apprentices before Jardine left for New York, where he became a successful illustrator and graphic designer. After he returned to Sydney in 1928, he opened a studio and secured work from a range of clients that included the Orient Steam Navigation Company, the Stamina Clothing Company, the Department of Defense, and the Agricultural Society of New South Wales.

Though artists such as Harry Winston and Blamire Young had created advertising posters in limited numbers before World War I, the successful adoption of posters to promote Australia's involvement in the war gave evidence that the poster could be used as a powerful advertising medium. During the war, James Northfield (1887-1973) was a leading poster designer, creating posters for recruitment, the purchase of Peace Bonds, and other purposes. Northfield was originally apprenticed with several printing companies before the war, which led to a mastery of color lithography. After the war, he opened his own agency, Northfield Studios, in Melbourne. His clients included many companies, the Victoria Railways, and the Australian National Travel Association (ANTA). For the latter two, he did many posters to promote Australian tourism.

Northfield's designs for posters as well as for his billboards were illustrative and narrative, adopting rhetorical strategies of advertising such as emphasizing trade mark figures as he did in his posters for Jacko