on cover art, the book publishing industry was less noteworthy. Publishers such as Angus and Robertson in Sydney, Hawthorn Press in Melbourne, and the Hassell Press in Adelaide commissioned book covers from artists, but none stand out as having been particularly distinguished. Australia also had a small private press movement during the interwar years. The Green Press was started by Perce Green, who at the time of its founding, around 192o, worked in the typography department of the Smith & Julius studio. The studio owned the Green Press, and Sydney Ure Smith used it to print a catalog of his own etchings as well as books for the Australian Limited Editions Society of which he was an active member. Other private presses included the Legend Press, founded by the Sydney artist, art dealer, and gallery director John Brackenreg (1905- 1986), and the Fanfrolico Press, that the artist Norman Lindsay started with several others around 1923. The Fanfrolico Press published a number of handsome limited edition books, most of which were illustrated by Lindsay, who was also involved with the design of the title pages, initial letters, and covers. Ursula Prunster has compared these books to The Yellow Book, The Savoy, and other fin-de-siècle British publications with Aubrey Beardsley's illustrations.

## Graphic design emerges

The generation of commercial artists who worked for advertising agencies or clients such as department stores through the 192os were for the most part fine artists who did commercial art to make a living. While they produced excellent work, their orientation was towards illustration rather than comprehensive layouts that featured typography and images as integral parts of a design. By the 193os, a new generation of young designers had emerged. Their initial training was in art schools, followed by diverse experience working for advertising agencies, printers, and even department stores. Both Douglas Annand, who was a mural painter as well as a graphic designer, and Geoff Collings (1905– 2ooo) studied commercial art at the Central Technical

College in Brisbane. Initially Annand had a number of different jobs including employment at several advertising agencies. In 1931 he set up a graphic design studio in Sydney and undertook a range of commissions for textiles, wrapping papers, advertisements, and magazine covers. Most likely through his earlier contact with Sydney Ure Smith, Annand was commissioned to paint a mural on the ceiling of the Australian Pavilion for the 1937 World's Fair in Paris and perhaps through his contacts with the ANTA he was tapped to head the design team for the landmark Australian Pavilion at the 1939 World's Fair in New York.

Geoff Collings began his career in a Brisbane advertising agency, which was followed by a position with a process engraving company. In 193o, Collings left for London, where he worked for the publisher W. H. Smith & Sons. Returning to Australia in 1933, he met his wife-to-be Dahl and they married that year. She had studied art and design at the Sydney Technical College and got her first design job at the Anthony Hordern & Sons department store, where she did illustrations for their house magazine and catalog. She also began to do freelance work for other department stores along with covers for Sydney Ure Smith's The Home magazine.

In 1935, the Collingses went to London, where Geoff worked as an art director for an American advertising agency, and Dahl started to build a career as a freelance designer, working on murals, exhibitions, and illustrations for leading fashion magazines. Eventually, Dahl was offered a job in the studio of László Moholy-Nagy, who had come to London as an émigré in 1935. Moholy-Nagy had the account for Simpson's department store, with responsibility for the store's total image from publicity to interior design. Working with Moholy-Nagy and Gyorgy Kepes, a fellow Hungarian who had started to collaborate with Moholy-Nagy in Berlin a few years earlier, Dahl was exposed to a designerly way of working, where everything was considered as part of a total plan. Dahl also recommended another Australian whom Moholy-Nagy