hired-Alistair Morrison (1911-1998). He had studied art in Melbourne, begun to freelance as a graphic designer there and then in Sydney, and afterwards went to London, like the Collingses, to seek more experience. Following his time with Moholy-Nagy, Morrison worked for other British clients including the publisher Lund Humphries and Shell Oil, which was developing a high-profile advertising campaign under the art direction of Jack Beddington (see Chapter 23).

In mid-1938, the Collingses and Alistair Morrison had a show of their commercial art at the Lund Humphries galleries in London. It was highly praised by E. McKnight Kauffer, the prominent American graphic designer then working in London, who said that the exhibition showed a more intellectual side of Australia than had been previously imagined. The year before, the three Australian designers had been joined in London by Gordon Andrews (1914–2oo1), a friend from Sydney, who worked for the Stuart Advertising Agency. Like them, Andrews went back to Australia in 1939, due to the threat of war.

When the Collingses returned to Sydney, they formed a new studio with the British designer Richard Haughton James. They called it the Design Centre to designate a broad idea of design, as their intent was to practice different types of design from the creation of products to graphics. They did obtain one commission for a product—the design of a radio for AWA—but most of their work was art direction, graphics, illustration, and exhibition design. In 1939, the Collingses also organized an Exhibition of Modern Industrial Art and Documentary Photography at the gallery that belonged to the David Jones department store. This was an opportunity to introduce to the Sydney public some of the new design ideas they had absorbed in London and to argue for a generalist design practice that might embrace the design of graphics, industrial products, exhibitions, or even the production of documentary films.

## Exhibition pavilions

At the 1924 British Empire Exhibition in Wembley, the Australian Pavilion with its Beaux Arts classicism conveyed a British image, as did the pavilions of Canada and New Zealand. The displays, which emphasized Australia's ability to supply Britain and Europe with raw materials, featured demonstrations of sheep shearing, a working gold mine, and a bakery that provided visitors with cakes made with Australian ingredients. Australia did not exhibit at the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, nor did it participate in other exhibitions of the interwar period until 1937 when the art publisher and artist Sydney Ure Smith supervised the design of a pavilion for the 1937 Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques in Paris. Little was spent on the pavilion and its circular design was uninspiring. Although numerous critics expressed dismay at the impression it made, it did have some significant departures from earlier pavilions, notably the concept of an exhibition rather than simply a collection of things to display. Douglas Annand created a mural for the ceiling that located Australia on a map of the world, while a number of photographic murals depicted images intended to represent the Australian way of life. As Simon Jackson has noted, however, the photo mural emphasized rural scenery and bush life while there was also a noticeable absence of finished goods in the pavilion even though at this time Australian companies were manufacturing a considerable number of products, almost all of which were for domestic consumption. Despite the attention to a designed space, Jackson considers the 1937 pavilion to be the last of an older style of display.

Certainly the Australian Pavilion at the New York World's Fair in 1939, which was a project of the Australian National Travel Association, may be considered a high point of Australian pre-World War II design practice. Like the 1937 pavilion, Sydney Ure Smith was on the advisory committee that put the project team together. Its members were dedicated to modern design and consequently the pavilion became a