## Graphic design

## Magazines, newspapers, and book publishing

Most of the printing around 19oo was for newspapers and a few magazines such as the New Zealand Graphic and Ladies Journal and The New Zealand Illustrated Magazine, which was founded as a monthly in 1899 and lasted only until 1905. The Illustrated featured poetry, short stories, and articles by New Zealand's top writers, along with drawings by prominent artists and illustrators. A leading illustrator for the magazine was Trevor Lloyd (1863–1937), an artist whose illustrations and cartoons also appeared regularly in the New Zealand Graphic, The New Zealand Herald and The Auckland Weekly News. Lloyd worked as an illustrator, graphic artist, and cartoonist for the Weekly News. He is said to have drawn the first cartoon that used the kiwi bird to represent New Zealand. Most of his early work consisted of line and wash drawings, although he later contributed pen and ink sketches to the Saturday supplement of The New Zealand Herald. Lloyd had a special interest in Maori culture and often used Maori motifs as well as New Zealand flora and fauna in his decorative borders for the Weekly News.

Other illustrators for The New Zealand Illustrated Magazine include Frances Hodgkins (1869-1947), one of New Zealand's first modern painters, and Andrew Kennaway Henderson (1879-196o), who worked as a commercial and lithographic artist for The Weekly Press, beginning in 1904. Henderson had earlier written, illustrated, and published two issues of an illustrated humor magazine, Fun, which lasted for two years. In 1936, shortly after the Labor Party won the national election, he began to edit and manage a radical political and literary magazine, Tomorrow, which closed in 194o, a victim of censorship. Each issue featured one of his cartoons that criticized a different institution, whether the press, the military, the Church, or business interests.

Among commercial book publishers, Whitcombe and Tombs was without a rival until 1932 when A. H. and A. W. Reed founded a firm that bore their names.

However, the major advances in fine printing were not made by the commercial publishers but by a group of small private presses, whose books evinced the high typographic standards of their printers. A central figure among these printers was Robert Lowry (1912-1963), who first demonstrated his interest in fine printing as the printer/typographer for four issues of Phoenix, a literary magazine published at Auckland University College in 1932-1933. Lowry was joined at the university by Ron Holloway (19o9–2oo3), who assisted him with improving the university's typographical standards. Among his projects, he worked with Lowry on Phoenix and another journal, Kiwi.

Subsequently both left the university and became partners in the Unicorn Press, which began to publish books of poetry, fiction, and essays by New Zealand's leading writers such as R. A. K. Mason, Frank Sargeson, and Roderick Finlayson. In 1938, the partnership ended. Holloway and his wife established a new venture, the Griffin Press, where they published writers from the same milieu. Lowry began to publish a series of experimental typographic books, foremost of which was The sky is a limpet by A. R. D. Fairburn. The design had some analogy to various Surrealist and Dada publications. Lowry mixed typefaces and interspersed small line illustrations with the text, whose wordplay recalls James Joyce's Finnegan's Wake.

There was comparable small press activity in Christchurch, where the poet Denis Glover (1912–1980) founded the Caxton Press. As a student at Canterbury College in the early 193os, Glover organized a printing club, which he named the Caxton Club Press. The press was moved off campus due to a conflict with the university authorities and was renamed the Caxton Press. Glover, who ran the press with a partner, worked as a jobbing printer, while also publishing books by emerging and established New Zealand writers.

Glover was joined by the artist Leo Bensemann (1912–1986), who collaborated with him on the typography and production of the Caxton Press books. As a graphic artist, Bensemann designed numerous