Gropius's in Dessau, the Törten housing estate, which was built with standardized components. Though there were some problems with the construction, the project pioneered new methods of low-cost efficient building that gradually began to spread within the German construction industry.

Though Meyer's emphasis on science and technology and his extreme left-wing politics antagonized some of his colleagues and some students, he did accomplish a lot at the Bauhaus and these contributions should be recognized. First, Meyer brought in a series of lecturers with knowledge of science, engineering, and the social sciences to speak about theoretical issues that might have a bearing on the curriculum. Second, he shifted the emphasis in the cabinetmaking workshop, now combined with the metal workshop, towards low-cost furniture for the working class. Compared to the more widely recognized icons of modern furniture such as Breuer's Wassily chair and his cantilevered tubular steel Cesca chair, the furniture produced under Meyer is less well known. Made primarily of wood, it featured a folding table and chair by Gustav Hassenpflug (1907–1997), a chair made of modular parts that Josef Albers designed, and a folding chair of tubular steel and plywood that Hin Bredendieck (1904-1995) created. Meyer publicized this populist approach to furniture design in several exhibitions, first in Leipzig in 1929, where the living room, bedroom, and kitchen of a Bauhaus Volkswohnung (People's Apartment) was on display, and then the following year in Moscow where he sent an exhibit that summed up Bauhaus achievements between 1928 and 1930.

Under Meyer, Joost Schmidt, a former Bauhaus student and head of the sculpture workshop, replaced Bayer in the workshop for advertising, commercial art, and typography. Schmidt worked out a successful pedagogical method for teaching students visual fundamentals, while also adding an emphasis on exhibition design. His department also designed exhibition stands for the Junkers airplane factory in Dessau and won a contract to do all the newspaper advertising for the large chemical factory, I. G. Farben. Schmidt's advertising and typography workshop was supported by a new photography workshop that was established in 1929. It was headed by Walter Pederhans (1897-1960), an industrial and portrait photographer before going to the Bauhaus, who specialized in close-ups of objects, an approach that lent itself particularly to advertising photography. Meyer's biggest commercial success was the Bauhaus wallpapers that were designed in the wall painting workshop under Hinerk Scheper. Commissioned by a wallpaper manufacturer, Emil Rasch, their subtle textures and patterns were unlike anything else on the market and four and a half million rolls were sold in the first year alone.

During his tenure as director, Gropius had sought to keep the Bauhaus politically neutral. Meyer, however, allowed the formation of a communist cell at the school, while also establishing closer ties with his counterparts in Moscow. By 193o, his political activities prompted the Dessau City Council to demand his resignation. He then took some students with him to the Soviet Union where, as the Bauhaus Brigade, they sought an engagement with the ambitious building program of Stalin's First Five-Year Plan.

## The Mies years

Meyer was replaced by the architect Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969), who moved the school in its final phase towards an architectural program. He combined the furniture, metal, and wallpainting workshops into a single department for interior design, which was headed by the interior architect Lilly Reich (1885–1947), beginning in 1932. Reich was also in charge of the weaving workshop.

Mies divided the school into two main areas: architecture and interior design. His principal interest during his period as director was in single-family residences, which was a major shift from the radical social agenda of Hannes Meyer. The focus in the interior design seminar, headed first by Alfred Arndt