decorative elements such as initial letters, chapter headings, and tailpieces, while also creating strong illustrations that reflected his interest in myth, folklore, and the grotesque. Another private press that was formed during the 193os was Noel Hoggard's Handcraft Press, which, like its counterparts, matched outstanding design and handset printing with highquality literature.

## Posters, advertising, and publicity campaigns

Lithographic posters appeared much later in New Zealand than they did in Europe or the United States. Posters were mainly typographic until occasional lithographic placards began to appear around 19o5. In the major urban centers, printers such as the Caxton Printing Company in Dunedin, Clarke and Matheson in Auckland, Whitcombe and Tombs in Christchurch, and the Government Printer in Wellington started to introduce flatbed litho presses, giving them the capability for poster production.

Though more than 1o percent of New Zealand's population served overseas during World War I, posters related to the war were comparatively few and generally lacked strong graphic images. Their intent was largely to solicit funds for the war effort rather than recruit soldiers or warn citizens of danger. The first major impetus to poster design came from the New Zealand Railways, which established a publicity branch, the Railways Studios, in 192o. It is likely that the publicity campaigns of the London Underground, campaigns of British regional railroads such as the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER), and those of the Canadian Pacific Railroad were stimuli for this service.

Publicity from the Railways Studios not only included posters but also pamphlets, maps, and pictorial postage stamps. Besides promoting the services of the railroad, the Railways Studios also created publicity for many government and business clients that advertised on poster hoardings in the railway stations, inside the rail cars, and on platforms where passengers boarded the trains. Beginning with ten people, the staff grew to more than 7o commercial artists, sign painters, photographers, and carpenters by 1924. In late 1927 the railroad created its own Outdoor Advertising Branch, following a trip abroad by the Minister of Railways who observed how effectively many of the world's leading railways used publicity. The Outdoor Advertising Branch worked closely with the Government Tourist Department, which had been founded in 19o1 to encourage travel within the country. Besides broad encouragement to see New Zealand, the department promoted travel to particular destinations such as the Waitomo Caves, Mt. Cook, Lake Wanaka, and Fiordland.

Many artists who worked for the Railways Studios came from painting backgrounds, consequently a number of the posters featured colorful landscape scenes of different destinations accompanied by lettering that varied from one poster to another and was most likely added by the printer. By the late 192os, however, several art schools——notably the Elam School of Art in Auckland---were giving some emphasis to commercial art, and more design influence became evident in some of the railway posters such as one that promoted travel to Napier, which, as mentioned previously, had been rebuilt in an Art Deco style after the 1931 earthquake. This poster not only featured the flat color that lithography made possible, but also lettering that was integrated into the total design.

The Supervising Artist of the Outdoor Advertising Branch until the late 193os was Stanley Davis (188z-1938), who had a large hand in shaping its advertising program. Davis had emigrated to New Zealand from England after World War I and joined the Railways Studios in 1922. Among the artists who undertook commissions for the Outdoor Advertising Branch was Edgar Lovell-Smith (1875-1950), a lithographer, illustrator, and painter whose colorful wash illustrations depicted dramatic landscapes such as the Franz Josef Glacier or scenes of tourists at prominent sites like the Chateau Tongariro.

Before World War II, government agencies were

Commonwealth Countries: Canada, Australia, and New Zealand 1900–1939

probably the most active consumers of commercial art, particularly agencies whose primary concern was tourism. The settler government was interested in attracting tourists even before New Zealand became a dominion in 19or. A Tourist Office within the government Railways Department was established in 19oi--a precursor to the Railways Studios—-and within several years this office evolved into a separate Department of Tourist and Health Resorts. Among the early tourist attractions were thermal springs, along with beautiful settings that were suitable for outdoor recreation and sports. In 1923, the government formed a Publicity Office that was attached to the Department of Internal Affairs. One of its activities was to make short travelogues to promote tourism locally and overseas. The office hired a private studio, Filmcraft Ltd, to process these films, but around 193o it bought out Filmcraft's studio, which became the home of the National Film Unit, established in 1941 to document New Zealand's war effort. The National Film Unit had its own publicity department, which produced posters and other materials.

Two artists who designed posters for Filmcraft and then for the Tourist and Publicity Department, formerly the Government Tourist Department, were George Bridgeman (1897-1966) and Leonard Mitchell (1901-1971). Bridgeman, an Englishman, arrived in New Zealand in the mid-192os. After stints with Filmcraft and the Tourist and Publicity Department, he became art director of the government's National Publicity Studios, which produced posters related to health and safety among other subjects. Bridgeman is known for several posters of the 194os that promoted automobile safety by showing the disastrous consequences of reckless driving—a distraught driver holding a dead girl, and a car out of control. As a designer, he understood the importance of lettering and used it dramatically in his posters.

Leonard Mitchell began as an apprentice sign writer and decorator before he became a commercial artist. He was head artist for Filmcraft Ltd in the late

192os and then designed posters and produced illustrations for the Tourist and Publicity Department in the 193os. He was also active as a stamp designer. Mitchell's lithographed tourist posters were of several genres. One was landscapes that were drenched in color, such as his posters for Mt. Egmont, Mitre Peak at Milford Sound, and others that depicted tourists enjoying tourist sites such as the thermal springs in Rotorua and the heights of Mt. Cook (Plate 61). Another artist who designed travel posters was Marcus King (1891-1983), who had studied painting with the Swedish artist Edward Friström at the Elam School of Art in Auckland. King worked a great deal with silkscreen printing, which emphasized the flatness of the colors. He did occasional landscape posters as did Leonard Mitchell, but his color palette was much lighter. On some of his posters, King featured iconic symbols like the Alpine Parrot and the Rata Blossom and he depicted as well scenes that characterized New Zealand life such as sheep and cattle droving. The Forest Service had its own dedicated commercial artist, A. H. Messenger (1877-1962), a prior art editor for the Auckland Weekly News and an ardent environmentalist.

An additional purpose of government publicity, besides tourism and public service messages, was the promotion of goods produced by the various marketing boards that had been established in the 192os. Joseph Moran (1874-1953) worked extensively for the Fruit Marketing Board, producing posters and labels for the many different fruits—apples, pears, grapefruit, and oranges—that New Zealand farmers grew. A commercial illustrator rather than a painter, his style was closer to American realistic illustration or occasionally French Art Deco than those of other New Zealand poster artists. Moran also designed posters for other clients and these tended to feature comic drawings. He understood the place of lettering in a poster design more so than other poster artists whose backgrounds were in painting.

Posters for commercial products also began to appear at the time lithography became popular early