## Chapter 32: The Near and Middle East 1900-1939

## The Ottoman Empire

At the end of the 19th century, the Ottoman Empire encompassed much of the Near East and Middle East regions. Istanbul was the capital of the empire and other major cities were Baghdad, Damascus, Beirut, Cairo, and Jerusalem. During the Tanzimat period between 1839 and 1876, a time of reorganization, the empire underwent a series of modernizing reforms that resulted in a new constitution as well as changes in the military, along with banking, and manufacturing. However, the constitutional reforms were short-lived and their revocation, coupled with an atmosphere of rising nationalism throughout Europe, increased dissatisfaction with the ruling Ottoman oligarchy headed by Sultan Abdul Hamid II, who ruled from 1876 to 1909. The Young Turk Revolution of 19o8 led to a restoration of the suspended constitution and parliament, while Arab demands for greater autonomy within the empire contributed to the unrest. In the years leading up to World War I, the empire lost some of its territory in regional conflicts, and by the end of the war, during which the Ottomans had allied with the Germans and the Austro-Hungarians, who were defeated, their empire had begun to unravel.

As a result of the Turkish War of Independence, fought between 1918 and 1923 and led by Mustafa Kemal Pasha, subsequently known as Kemal Ataturk, the Republic of Turkey was established. Other parts of the empire were placed under mandates by the League of Nations. In 1922, Britain was given governing authority over Iraq, Palestine, and Transjordan, while the French were awarded dominion over Syria and Lebanon. The British had occupied Egypt in 1882 to defend their interests in the Suez Canal. Though Egypt was still officially within the Ottoman Empire, it came under the British sphere of influence and was made a protectorate in 1914, gaining independence in 1922. After World War I, the Arabian Peninsula over which the Ottomans previously had partial control divided into a number of autonomous regions that eventually became states. These included Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Yemen. The one country in the region that had remained outside the boundaries of the Ottoman Empire was Iran.

Ottoman culture in the late 19th century embraced a mix of Western and Eastern influences. The social elite was oriented towards Europe and imported most of their goods from abroad, while others consumed local products that were made by independent craftsmen or in artisanal workshops and a few factories. Telephones were introduced in 188ı and were in limited use before World War I. Although the road system was still rather inadequate, the Ottoman government allowed the importation of automobiles and a few were in use in Istanbul, Izmir, and other provinces. As early as 1885, Belgian and French companies introduced streetcars to Izmir, then to Istanbul in 1889, Salonika in 1892, and later to Damascus and Beirut. Initially these streetcars were horse-drawn, but electric vehicles soon replaced them.

The late 19th- and early 2oth-century Ottoman economy was predominantly agricultural (see Chapter 15), although there were factories and shipyards that produced equipment for the military, which was one of the few to have its own air force during World War I, even though its planes were manufactured abroad. Among the leading handicraft industries was the manufacture of shoes, which were produced in a few hundred small workshops rather than a single large factory. Despite this dispersal of production, however, the workshops managed to provide most of the shoes that were sold domestically, thus becoming one of the