written and printed in Arabic script. At the same time, Ataturk claimed that the roman alphabet, which was phonetic and whose orthography was simpler than Arabic, would make it easier for those who were illiterate to learn to read (Fig. 32.o1). Most literate Turks, however, who comprised a narrow segment of the population, were already familiar with the roman alphabet through their knowledge of Western languages such as French, Italian, English, or German. Thus, the transition to romanized Turkish was not difficult for the educated class.

## The Six Arrows of the 1930s

At the 1931 Congress of the Revolutionary People's Party, Ataturk introduced six principles that would provide the foundation for his governance of Turkey. Known as the Alti Ok or Six Arrows, they were represented in the party's logo shooting out in all directions from a sphere whose outline was suggested by a negative space. The Six Arrows logo was applied in various ways including RPP flags and was also embossed on commercial objects such as cigarette lighters. The six principles that the arrows represented defined a constitutional republic based on modern institutions whose purpose was to serve the national good. Central to their enforcement was a strong government with Ataturk at its center. Statism, one of the six principles, declared that the government would have the primary responsibility for Turkey's economic development. Although there was a place for individual entrepreneurs, the government would invest in large state enterprises. Ataturk would have preferred private enterprise to fuel Turkey's economic development, but this strategy did not succeed during the 192os.

After statism became the official economic policy, the government established the Sumerbank (Sumerian Bank), whose responsibility was to oversee existing state factories and enterprises, establish new ones, and participate in ventures with individual entrepreneurs. Over time, the Sumerbank was involved with all areas of production, including both heavy industry and consumer products. As well, it started vocational schools that were related to its major industries and offered scholarships for study in Turkey and abroad. The Sumerbank also opened a chain of department stores to sell the products of its factories such as shoes and textiles. As a government enterprise, these stores were able to feature national products and keep prices down by controlling a part of the market that was no longer accessible to importers of foreign goods.

Although Turkey became a major trading partner with Germany during the 193os, Ataturk based Turkey's economic development on the Soviet Union's Five-Year Plan. The two plans that the Turkish government implemented in the 193os emphasized industrial development rather than agriculture. Unlike the Soviet plans that gave primacy to heavy industry, however, the first Turkish Five-Year Plan featured consumer goods, although heavy industries were also considered. These were developed largely by the Etibank (Hittite Bank), which was active in mineral and petroleum exploration, electric-power facilities, and coal mining. The Second Five-Year Plan paid more attention to capital industries such as mining, electricity, ports, and heavy machinery.

Part of Ataturk's industrialization program was to encourage the public to participate in new forms of consumption. In 1929 the government launched the National Economy and Savings Society, which was established to promote national products and to urge people to live moderately. This indicated a shift to a model of consumption exemplified by the Western middle classes and away from the extravagance of the previous Ottoman elite. The society convened a Congress of Industry in 193o to discuss ways of increasing national production and improving the quality of Turkish goods.

By 1933, the National Economy and Savings Society had 21o branches in cities and towns throughout Turkey. Its program included propaganda materials, producing brochures for the public and materials for schools, and organizing an annual Savings and National Products Week. The society also promoted Turkey's participation in domestic and foreign exhibitions such as the Budapest International Exhibition of 1931, where the modern architect Sedad Eldem (1908–1988) designed Turkey's Pavilion. Turkey had a pavilion as well at the 1936 Levant Fair in Palestine, where it was one of the few states in the region that participated.

At home, the National Economy and Savings Society organized a major Exhibition of National Economy in 1933 on the roth anniversary of the founding of the Turkish Republic. On display was an array of Turkish industrial and agricultural products including textiles and carpets, both products of traditional industries, along with various foodstuffs and maps and charts that depicted railroad construction and electrification. The rhetoric of the organizers looked ahead to a technological future, but it also made reference to heroic events in the Turkish past. The joining of industrial ambition to nationalist rhetoric was characteristic of Ataturk's six principles within which enterprise, consumption, and personal values were joined together in the project of nation-building.

Other exhibitions followed, each continuing to develop presentation techniques that had been pioneered by designers outside Turkey such as El Lissitzky with his bombastic Pressa Exhibition of 1928. Other influential exhibitions of the early 193os included the 1932 Mostra della Rivoluzione in Rome (see Chapter 27). A 1934 exhibit that celebrated Turkey's First Five-Year Plan incorporated many techniques of those earlier exhibits: large-scale photographs, photomontage, enlarged typography, and bold graphics to recount the history of'Turkish industry, agriculture, and economy from the late Ottoman period to the present.

The republic's most ambitious exhibition project, however, was the Izmir International Fair, which grew out of a series of industrial exhibits that had been held annually since 1927. It was officially launched in 1933 and moved in 1936 to a new site, the Kulturpark (Culture Park), which had been specially designed to accommodate a large number of pavilions. The Turkish pavilions were mainly modern, making the fair a showcase for the latest designs by the nation's architects. The 1936 fair had only three pavilions from abroad, including one from Egypt, but the fairs between 1937 and 1939 featured pavilions built by a number of foreign governments including Italy, Germany, Britain, and Iran. The closest counterpart to the Izmir International Fair in the region was the Levant Fair in Palestine, which was a showcase for the modern pavilions designed by Jewish architects just as the Izmir fair featured pavilions by architects from Turkey.

Although the well-developed program of industrial exhibitions in Turkey during the 193os promoted images of a modern lifestyle that exceeded the nation's manufacturing ability at the time, they nonetheless created aspirations that Turkish industries sought to fulfill after World War II. In the meantime, a number of companies did import modern products such as consumer appliances from abroad. The largest of these was probably Bourla Brothers, which brought to Turkey American radios manufactured by RCA, and refrigerators made by Frigidaire, along with German radios that Telefunken produced.

Some of Turkey's modern architects, whose buildings were characterized with the rubric "cubic architecture," were frustrated by the lack of companies that could produce a full range of modern furniture and appliances they believed should fll the houses they designed. In various popular and professional magazines, architects published drawings of modern interiors with cubic furniture," but the Turkish furniture industry was not making pieces in this style, nor was there a sufficient market to induce leading manufacturers outside Turkey like Thonet to open showrooms in Istanbul or Ankara. Though some modern furniture was most likely imported by individual entrepreneurs, the absence of interior or furniture designers with a modern sensibility led the artist and critic Celal Esat Arseven (1876-1972) to propose that the architect ought also to be a furniture designer in order to attend to the many needs that arose from living in a modern house.