(1896–1976), a former student, and then by Lilly Reich, was on reasonably priced furniture for the home. Students learned to make precision construction drawings and several won prizes in a 1931 Werkbund competition for standardized home furnishings. In late 1932, the Dessau parliament, which now had a large number of Nazi members, closed the Bauhaus. Mies moved the school to Berlin, where it briefly occupied a vacant telephone factory until he finally shut it down in August 1933. Clearly the Bauhaus values, whether socialist, communist, or simply modernist, were out of step with the new Nazi regime.

## Other Design Schools

Despite all its accomplishments, however, the Bauhaus engaged in only a limited segment of the modern industrial production that was emerging in Europe. Its constraints were framed by the initial emphasis on architecture and its related arts rather than the broader array of industrial products including automobiles, airplanes, radios, and other goods that formed a growing part of Germany's industrial culture. In general, the constraints of the Bauhaus were typical of other applied arts schools in Germany during the 192os. In Frankfurt, Christian Dell (1893–1974), who had been the technical instructor in the Bauhaus metal workshop, headed up a comparable program, and in Stuttgart, the art academy, headed by Bernhard Pankok (1872-1943), the former Jugendstil designer, developed strong programs in furniture design and typography.

The school that had the most direct relation to the Bauhaus was Burg Giebichenstein in Halle. It was established in 1915 by the architect Paul Thiersch (1879– 1928), who sought to realize the Werkbund ideals with a strong art program and complementary workshops that could produce prototypes for industry. When the Bauhaus moved from Weimar to Dessau, Gerhard Marcks, who had directed the pottery workshop in Weimar, went to teach at Burg Giebichenstein and in 1928 he became the school's director. Between 1925 and 193o, while at the Halle school, Marcks along with

Wilhelm Wagenfeld designed his well-known Sintrax coffee percolator for the Jena Glass Company.

Several former Bauhaus students—Benita Otte (1892-1976), Erich Dieckmann (1896–1944), and Marguerite Friedlander-Wildenhain—joined Marcks at Burg Giebichenstein. Otte took over the weaving workshop, where her course was more open to artistic experiment than the growing tendency towards machine production in Dessau. Dieckmann, who headed the furniture workshop, designed both wooden furniture and furniture made of cantilevered steel. In ceramics, Marguerite Friedlander-Wildenhain achieved great success with her previously mentioned Halle service for the Staatliche Porzellan-Manufaktur, Berlin, while one of the prominent graduates of the metal workshop, Wolfgang Tümpel (1903-1978), gained recognition as a designer of lamps, bowls, teapots, and other metalwork.

Besides the applied arts schools in Frankfurt, Stuttgart, Halle, and other cities, a number of private art schools offered successful design programs. Among the leading ones were. the Itten-Schule and the Riemann-Schule. In 1926, Johannes Itten, who left the Bauhaus in 1923, opened his own school in Berlin. It provided basic art education for aspiring artists, architects, photographers, advertising artists, designers of fashion, and other types of designers. Among the faculty were George Muche, who had assisted Itten in the Bauhaus Foundation course and also headed the weaving workshop. Other teachers included former Bauhaus students Gyula Pap (1899-1983), who had studied in the metal workshop with Moholy-Nagy and Umbo (a.k.a Otto Umbehr) (1902-1980), who became a well-known photojournalist. Lucia Moholy (1894-1989), Moholy-Nagy's first wife, also taught photography there. The curriculum featured classes based on Itten's Bauhaus foundation course. In the morning, students had a gymnastic session that included singing and humming to harmonize the body and spirit. Itten also made contact with several Japanese artists, and around 1932 the school offered classes in Japanese brush painting.