and five years later Deror (Liberty), a newspaper whose Hebrew text was transliterated into roman characters. Deror contained four pages in Hebrew characters and four in Ben-Avi's romanized version. Like his earlier experiment, Deror lasted only a short time and failed to ignite a movement to romanize the Hebrew alphabet. Aside from considerable opposition, one obstacle to achieving the romanization was the difficulty that different proponents had in agreeing on a single pattern or transliteration.

Hugh J. Schonfield made another radical proposal to romanize Hebrew in his book The New Hebrew Typography, published in London in 1932. Schonfield claimed that conventional Hebrew was incapable of accommodating both upper- and lower-case letters, italics, and other variants that were characteristic of roman alphabets. Hence he redesigned the Hebrew alphabet, substituting some new letter shapes, believing that a redesigned alphabet ought to have the same flexibility as its roman counterparts. Therefore he envisioned alphabets such as Caslon Hebrew, Kabel Hebrew, and Ultra Bodoni Hebrew.

In an introduction to the book, the eminent British typographer Stanley Morison concurred with Schonfield's proposal, implying that the "Jew qua Jew has not yet come of age typographically." Touting the superiority of roman alphabets for printing purposes, Morison noted that historically Hebrew printers lacked typographic reformers of Francesco Griffo's stature and consequently their alphabets remained deficient for modern use. His most extreme statement, however, was that the roman alphabet was superior by "right of conquest" due to its "inherent flexibility and rationalism." By contrast, he stated that "There is no prospect for the future of Hebrew—in spite of all the prayers and propaganda—if none but the traditional signs are used."

## Syria and Lebanon under the Ottomans and the French

At the beginning of the 2oth century, Syria and Lebanon were part of the Ottoman Empire. Both provinces had large Muslim populations but also communities that were not Muslims, a small one in Syria and one of considerable size in Lebanon consisting of the Maronites, who were Christians, and the Druze. The diversity of communities in this region had two consequences: one was conflict and the other was a rich cultural development that derived from different languages and customs. Damascus and Beirut were major commercial centers with connections that extended to Egypt, other Mediterranean provinces and countries, and also to Europe. Beirut, for example, was influenced by Al-Nahda (Renaissance), the cultural awakening that began in Egypt in the late 19th century and then spread to other Arabic-speaking countries. Well before the 2oth century, Western missionaries in both Syria and Lebanon established presses, schools, and colleges that contributed to the formation of an educated cosmopolitan class.

Following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire after World War I, -the European powers pursued their own interests in the region. The San Remo conference, held in 192o and attended by the four principal Allied powers in World War I—Britain, France, Italy, and Japan—divided part of the Ottoman Empire that had formerly encompassed Syria and Lebanon into two mandates, one for the British and one for the French. The British were given authority over the territory that was then partitioned into Palestine, Iraq, and Jordan, while the French received the newly constituted Syria and Lebanon. The same year, after King Faisal I assumed the kingship of Greater Syria, the French invaded Syria, intent on enforcing their own right to rule the region as established by the San Remo accord. Two years later, the newly created League of Nations formalized the British and French mandates.

The intent of the mandates was to prepare the regions under European supervision for self-rule, but neither Britain nor France felt the urgency to give up their control. Despite resistance to the French administration in both Syria and Lebanon, neither became independent until 1943, when the Free French forces