his dissatisfaction with the low-cost wooden furniture, which he thought had a look of poverty. As he once told a colleague, he was building homes not tin cans. In 1928, Marcel Breuer produced his own version of the cantilever form, the Cesca chair, which differed from both Stam's and Mies's designs by its combination of a partial tubular steel structure and black wooden frames for the back and seat. Caning was stretched over the frames. For the Weissenhof exhibition, tubular steel furniture was on display in a number of the dwellings and Breuer's earlier pieces, combined with lighting from the Bauhaus metal workshop, were exhibited in the two houses by Walter Gropius. They served as examples of what Breuer believed to be a "styleless modern room that avoided "any preconceived notion of the psyches of its users."

For Mies, architecture continued to be the stimulus for the further design of modern furniture. In 1929, when he designed the German Pavilion for the International Exhibition in Barcelona, he created two chairs made of chromed flat steel frames which supported leather cushioned seats and backs. The chairs came with matching footstools and a solid glass coffee table that rested on a chromed steel cross-frame. Shortly thereafter Mies returned to the cantilever concept with his chairs for the Tugendhat house in Brno, Czechoslovakia. The padded leather back and seat of the Brno chair were exquisitely suspended in mid-air, supported by a frame of flat chromed steel strips.

Neither Stam, Breuer, nor others who designed tubular steel furniture shared Mies's preoccupation with formal elegance, believing instead that tubular steel furnishings exemplified a modern way of living that was accessible to large numbers of people. The widespread display of tubular steel furniture at the Weissenhof exhibition most likely contributed to the belief of a few furniture manufacturers such as the Austrian firm Thonet that a viable market existed for the new designs. Thonet purchased its first tubular steel designs from Marcel Breuer who had unsuccessfully tried to market his initial pieces through his own company, Standard

Möbel. Thonet took over all Breuer's designs from the Standard Möbel catalog and began to market 19 different pieces. Although tubular steel furniture was more expensive than the low-priced designs in wood by Kramer, Schneck, and others, Thonet's mass production of it lowered the price substantially. Beginning in 1932, Thonet also began to manufacture some pieces by Mies, including his two Weissenhof chairs. Other architects who produced tubular steel pieces for Thonet were the Swiss Le Corbusier, the Frenchman Andre Lurçat (1894-197o), and the supposed French architect Béwé, who was most likely a fictional character devised by the company.

Thonet was the first furniture company to introduce tubular steel furniture to a mass market. By the late 193os, the firm had commissioned and produced several hundred designs, exploiting the material to the limit as it had previously with its bentwood chairs. But then, Thonet ceased to produce tubular steel furnishings, perhaps because so many of its designs were copied by other furniture companies both in Germany and abroad. Tubular steel had become as common as wood and when produced in sufficient amounts it was even as economical if not more so.

## Capitalist Advertising, Mass Media, and Communist Propaganda

During the 192os, advertising, typography, commercial art, mass media, and political propaganda in Germany were as diverse and complex as the economic and political situation of the nation itself. Before World War I, German poster design and advertising art as well as typography and printing had all developed to a high degree. After the war both the Dada and Constructivist avant-gardes adopted new forms of visual rhetoric that contrasted strongly with these developments. While Constructivism stimulated the emergence of the New Typography on the one hand, Dada contributed to the rise of a working-class press and print culture on the other. Weimar Germany also fostered the growth