primarily by British or Russian businessmen. Among the popular exports were carpets, shawls, and silk products. The economic historian Julian Bharier notes that working conditions in the handicraft industries were poor. Child labor was exploited and workers put in long hours, often laboring in shops that were badly lit and ventilated. There was an abundance of unskilled labor, while skilled craftsmen were few.

The rare attempts to introduce modern factories had failed by 19oo. A Russian entrepreneur established a factory to produce matches in 1889, a Belgian company started a glass factory in 1891, and an Iranian opened a cotton-spinning plant in 1894. All faced high costs of materials due to an underdeveloped transportation system, along with an inexperienced workforce and stiff competition from cheaper foreign imports.

However, local craftsmen possessed diverse skills and produced a wide range of items for domestic consumption. Copper and brass workers made cooking pots and kettles, water decanters, trays, samovars, coffee urns, and small braziers for cooking. Foundry men produced a few consumer products but also made parts cast in copper, bronze, brass, or nickel silver that were used in a multitude of other goods. Carpenters built furniture for the home—beds, plain tables, chairs, chests, and large trunks to hold a woman's dowry. Among the more industrialized products were the large copper boilers that were used to heat water in the hamams or public baths. Some objects were embellished with ornament that craftsmen created with different techniques such as engraving or embossing.

Though craft skills were generally passed on from master to apprentice, there were also concerns that such skills could die out unless they were taught in a formal setting. Some time after the Constitutional Revolution of 1905-1906, the painter Mohammad Ghaffari (1848-194o), known as Kamal-al-Molk, founded the Kamal-al-Molk Art School, where students learned traditional crafts—carpet weaving, mosaic design, and woodwork-—along with painting and sculpture. After the death of Kamal-al-Molk, his school was renamed the School of Arts and Crafts and in 1940 it merged with the School of Architecture to become the Faculty of Fine Arts in the University of Tehran.

Despite the diversity of craftsmen, most people from the laboring class worked in agriculture, which accounted for more than 9o percent of the Persian economy in 19oo. Until Reza Shah created a number of model farms in the 193os and introduced modern mechanized agricultural equipment, farmers worked mainly with primitive tools. Craftsmen made wooden plows consisting of a yoke and harness to which was attached a wooden beam with a metal blade. The design of these plows differed somewhat from one region to another. Wooden harrows with spikes attached were used to turn over the soil, while various types of scythes and sickles were made for harvesting wheat and rice.

Though Ahmad Shah established a Ministry of Commerce and Public Utilities in 19oo, he had little understanding of how to develop a productive economy and continued to regard the sale of concessions to foreigners as a principal source of revenue. In fact, the Ministry of Commerce and Public Utilities, which he established in 19oo, had a miniscule budget and did little more than give out mining leases. Oil was discovered in 1908, and in 1913 Persia became the first country in the region to initiate commercial production, following the formation of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company. This organization built the world's largest oil refinery, which remained an isolated example of advanced industrial development within a country whose economy was dominated by small trades and local farmers.

## A new industrialization policy

Attitudes to industrialization changed radically after the coup d’état of 1921. Even before Reza Khan became the Shah, government members began to consider questions of industrial development and exports. In an attempt to encourage native textile industries and combat the plethora of inexpensive imports, government employees and army personnel were required to wear clothing that was made locally.

In 1921, the government sponsored an exhibition of Persian crafts and industries in Tehran with the intent to increase exports and enhance manufacturing capability. A second exhibition of foreign machinery was held to encourage craftsmen to adopt modern technology. The latter exhibition led to a demand for new spinning and weaving machines and helped to promote a few large-scale factories to bolster the textile industry. It also led to the construction of several plants to produce paper and beverages. A few factories that made other goods followed.

The government provided support for these factories, notably the elimination of customs duties on imported machinery, on the condition that their founders would build them within a year and then employ a mainly local workforce. To improve the abilities of these new workers, the government founded a Technical Institute in 1924, where foreign experts trained a cadre of Persian students. Though such efforts were few compared to the vast number of craftsmen and farmers who continued to work in traditional ways, they constituted the beginning of an industrial economy that required skilled workers who understood techniques of mass production.

Reza Shah Pahlavi had ambitious plans for the modernization of Persia. He sought to create a secular society and diminish the influence of the Muslim clerics. Like Kemal Ataturk, he discouraged men from wearing traditional clothing, while a 1936 state decree eliminated the veil for women. He was a ruthless leader who admired the authoritarian states of Germany and Italy. During the 193os, the Shah maintained close economic and political relations with the Nazi regime, adopting German models for mass education campaigns and giving German experts and advisors major roles in the country's financial and industrial institutions. He glorified Persia's past and Aryan origins and in 1935, prompted by his ambassador to Berlin, he changed the country's name from

Persia to Iran to emphasize its role as the birthplace of the Aryan race.

The Shah strongly supported the industrialization of his country. Like Ataturk in Turkey, he wanted Iran to be economically self-sufficient, and early in his reign he pursued a policy of import substitution to reduce Iran's dependence on foreign goods. In 1927, he established the Bank Melli (National Bank) in Tehran, whose purpose was to foster industrial development. A German architect designed the monumental building in the style of the powerful Achaemenid Empire (55o–33o BCE), whose culture provided images of his country's former glory.

With the advanced technical operations of the Anglo-Persian oil refinery as a precedent, Reza Shah launched the construction of the Anglo-Iranian Railroad in 1927. Although it was built entirely by foreign experts, the railroad was financed with local resources derived primarily from taxes on imported tea and sugar. The project responsibilities were apportioned to experts from different countries to reduce dependence on a single one. Initially, an international syndicate, Ulen and Company, led by American and German firms, managed the work. In 1933, the construction contract was transferred to a Danish company, Kampsax, which sub-contracted parts of the project out to firms from more than 12 countries, including Iran itself. The line opened in 1939, having been completed ahead of schedule and under budget. Its 230 tunnels, 4,100 bridges, and many stone buttresses that were built along a precipitous terrain made the Anglo-Iranian Railroad an astonishing technological feat

In 1927, the government also arranged with the German aircraft company Junkers to establish a commercial airline, Company Havapeimai Yunkers dar Iran (Junkers Airline Company of Iran). Junkers set up a number of routes to carry passengers as well as mail, but this venture was less successful than the construction of the railroad. For unknown reasons Junkers’ relationship with the government ended in 1932 and a gap in domestic air travel existed until 1938,