## The regime of Reza Shah Pahlavi

The periodical press expanded under Reza Shah even though it was more susceptible than ever to censorship. The leading daily newspaper was Ettela'at (Information). Founded in 1926, it managed to maintain a comfortable relationship with Reza Shah's regime. It began as a four-page paper with a small circulation and by World War II it had doubled in size and attained a readership of 6o,ooo. A more precarious publication was Khalq (The People), which experienced a number of government shutdowns and one fire. The paper was originally published under a different name beginning in 192ı, and its name changed several times before it ceased publication in 1933. Among the black-and-white cartoons that Khalq printed were some that compared backward conditions in Persia with modern life in Europe.

Prior to the 193os, illustrations, whether editorial or for advertising, were primarily black-and-white drawings. By the 193os, however, mass circulation magazines were using photographs, just as their counterparts in other countries were. Photographs were prevalent in magazines such as Mehregan, whose intended audience was teen and young adult readers. Mehregan published articles on film stars, beauty culture, and current fashion trends. Covers frequently featured pictures of Hollywood movie stars or European beauties, while photographs of modern women were also widely displayed in the magazine's interior spreads. Such photographs in Mehregan or other magazines would not have been possible before Reza Shah sought to remove women's veils and launch the Women's Awakening Project, which lasted from 1936 until his exile in 1941. Before this project, newspapers and magazines rarely published pictures of women and never Iranian women. Depictions of women in advertising were a bit more liberal, and after 1936 even a bit daring on occasion.

Photographs were also prevalent in several propaganda magazines. Iran-e Bastan (Ancient Iran) was edited by a Nazi supporter, Sayf Azad. Founded in 1933, the year Hitler came to power, it was suppressed by

Reza Shah's regime two years later. 'The masthead on the cover included expressive nastaliq lettering combined with drawings that extolled the glory of Iran's ancient past, but the imagery and the title were misleading. The magazine purported to introduce Iran to foreigners, but instead it devoted much of its content to photographic portrayals of life in the Third Reich.

Though it was shut down by the government, Iran-e Bastan may have served as the model for Reza Shah's own magazine, Iran-e Emruz (Today's Iran), which began publication in 1939. Its editor was Muhammad Hejazi, a novelist who served as the head of the press committee in the Bureau for Public Enlightenment that Reza Shah had established the year before. Iran-e Emruz, like la Turquie Kamaliste in Turkey, sought to project a strong image of Iranian modernity (Plate 67). Among its special features were articles about women who were defying traditional roles by excelling in athletics, working in factories, participating in the arts, and even flying airplanes. Central to the publication were the layouts in which images were often creatively displayed (Fig. 32.46).

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

There is little written on design in any of the countries in the Near East and Middle East regions and I have consequently relied on books about economic and industrial development to provide information about handicrafts and other enterprises in these countries. Among the most useful general histories are Kurt Grunwald and Joachim O. Ronall, Industrialization in the Middle East, Charles Issawi, ed., The Economic History of the Middle East, 1800–1914; Roger Owen and Sevket Pamuk, A History of Middle East Economies in the Twentieth Century; and Roger Owen, The Middle East in the World Economy 1800-1914. Essential to understanding the history of Arab newspapers and magazines during this period is Ami Ayalon's The Press in the Arab Middle East: A History. On Arabic calligraphy and typography, key publications are Sheila

Blair, Islamic Calligraphy, and Huda Smitshuijzen AbiFarès, Arabic Typography: A Comprehensive Sourcebook.

For Turkey, Sibel Bozdoğan's book Modernism and Nation Building: Turkish Architectural Culture in the Early Republic was helpful for its discussion of Turkish middle-class consumer culture as well as its information about various exhibitions. For Egypt, Kristin Koptiuch's A Poetics of Political Economy in Egypt offered a useful way to think about Egyptian industrial policy and industrialization, Beth Baron wrote about the iconography of Egyptian nationalism in "Nationalist Iconography: Egypt as a Woman" in James Jankowski and Israel Gershoni, eds., Rethinking Nationalism in the Arab Middle East, and Donald M. Reid addressed a similar issue in his essay "Nationalizing the Pharaonic Past: Egyptology, Imperialism, and Egyptian Nationalism, 1922-1932," published in the same volume. Mona Russell's Creating the New Egyptian Woman: Consumerism, Education, and National Identity, 1863-1922 contains much difficult to find information about Egyptian advertising and popular media as does Relli Shechter's article, "Reading Advertisements in a Colonial/Development Context: Cigarette Advertising and Identity Politics in Egypt, c. 1919–1939," Journal of Social History 39, no. 2 (Winter 2005).

Hans Wulffs The Traditional Crafts of Persia: Their Development, Technology, and Influence on Eastern and Western Civilizations has considerable detailed material about Persian crafts, while Camron Michael Amin's article, "Importing Beauty Culture' into Iran in the 192os and 193os: Mass Marketing Individualism in an Age of Anti-Imperialist Sacrifice," Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 24, no. 1 (2oo4) has much helpful material about advertising in Persia and Iran as it was later called.

The most extensive documentation for any country or area in the region is for Palestine, much of it related to the Jewish experience. An outstanding source for material on the broad topic of Jewish activity in Palestine is the massive catalog Die Neuen

Hebräer: 1oo Jahre Kunst in Israel, edited by Doreet LeVitte Harten and Yigal Zalmona. The principal source for the Bezalel School of Arts and Crafts is Nurit Shilo-Cohen's comprehensive exhibition catalog Bezalel 1906–1929. Others who have written on Bezalel include Inka Bartz, Margaret Olin, and Dalia Manor. The Levant Fairs came to my attention through the book chapter by Sigal David Kunda and Robert Oxman, "The Flight of the Camel: The Levant Fair of 1934 and the Creation of a Situated Modernism," in Haim Jacobi, ed., Constructing a Sense of Place: Architecture and the Zionist Discourse, and I relied on the work of Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, "Performing the State: The Jewish Palestine Pavilion at the New York World's Fair, 1939/40,” in Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett and Jonathan Karp, eds. The Art of Being Jewish in Modern Times and James L. Gelvin, "Zionism and the Representation of Jewish Palestine’ at the New York World's Fair," The International History Review 22, no. 1 (March 2ooo) for information on that topic. Charles Robert Ashbee's role with the Pro-Jerusalem Society is discussed in Inbal Ben-Asher Gitler, "C.R. Ashbee's Jerusalem Years: Arts and Crafts, Orientalism and British Regionalism,"Assaph 5 (2ooo); Noah Hysler-Rubin, "Arts & Crafts and the Great City: Charles Robert Ashbee in Jerusalem," Planning Perspectives 21 (October 2oo6); and in Alan Crawford, C.R. Ashbee: Architect, Designer  Romantic Socialist. Further information on Arab crafts is contained in Kamal Boulatta, Palestinian Art: From 185o to the Present. The authoritative work on the Armenian ceramicists in Jerusalem is Nurith Kenaan-Kedar, The Armenian Ceramics of Jerusalem: Three Generations 1919–2003. Rashid Khalidi, Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern National Consciousness provides helpful background material on the Arab situation in Palestine during the mandate years, while Ami Ayalon's extensive writings on Palestinian publishing and political media were my principal source of information on this subject. See his essay "Inscribing the Public Domain: Arabic Placards, Proclamations and Handbills, in Philip Sadgrove, ed.,