villages to work in colonial enterprises. In the Belgian Congo and Northern Rhodesia, towns formed around mining businesses and more closely represented the traditional company towns in Europe. In Senegal, on the other hand, Dakar, where about half the total industry of French West Africa was concentrated before 1939, became a center of diverse enterprises and activities, while urban centers elsewhere like Lagos, Accra, Abidjan, Mombasa, and Nairobi grew into small cities that accommodated a greater range of living situations than did the company towns or the nouvelles villes in the Maghreb whose primary purpose was to house the families of French administrators and entrepreneurs. By the 193os, Johannesburg in South Africa had become Africa's largest and most cosmopolitan city, with the exception of Cairo.

## East and West Africa: From Craft Production to Manufacturing The practice of crafts

Craft production was central to the diverse economies that characterized the multitude of tribal cultures in pre-colonial East and West Africa. It continued as well during the colonial period. Many craftsmen created goods primarily for local markets. Working within tight kinship networks, they produced for family members and exchanged crafted household items for necessities with others. In tribal centers, patronage might come from a chief for whom craftsmen would make more elaborate functional or ritual objects. Crafted artifacts were frequently decorated with patterns that were unique to a tribe or region.

In subsistence economies, trade had little impact on the larger economic system but some craftsmen also participated in the trading economy, producing surplus items that could be sold in distant markets located along the various trade routes. Here too the trade between Africans involved articles of everyday use, while European traders by contrast tended to be interested in craft objects that reinforced colonial images of primitive life; hence the lively trade in African masks, shields, spears, and other ritual items. This was the principal means by which African crafts entered international markets, as there was no European demand for more utilitarian objects such as farm tools, containers, or woven mats, which were the mainstays of many African artisans.

In his book Black Byzantium, the anthropologist S. F. Nadel provides a description of how the Nupe people in Nigeria supported craft production in their community as late as the 194os. Production was divided between the work organized by guilds and that of individual craftsmen. The guilds ranged across a number of different crafts including blacksmithing, brass- and silversmithing, weaving, glassmaking, beadwork, woodwork, and carpentry. Individual crafts included tailoring and embroidery, leatherwork, straw-hat making, indigo dyeing, mat making, and basket weaving. Most craftsmen were located in Bida, the principal Nupe town, but some also worked in surrounding villages. Within the guilds, Nadel distinguished two types of cooperation: that among guild members as a group and that among individuals working together in particular workshops. Family members usually worked under a senior relative who headed the workshop, and training occurred through a lengthy apprentice system.

Production was intended to satisfy the needs of daily life, which also included luxury items. Blacksmiths, for example, made the tools for farming, especially hoes for which they created the iron blades that were attached to wooden handles. When they found themselves with surplus goods, other family members were sent to surrounding towns and villages to try to sell them. Brass smiths made luxury items of adornment but also created a wealth of other objects— sword hilts and daggers, horse-trappings, bowls, jugs, trays, ladles, and various receptacles made of beaten brass and copper. By the early 194os, the Nupe brass smiths were concentrating on export items, while also creating some pieces specifically for tourists. Individual objects had distinctive shapes and were also decorated with ornamental patterns.

Bida glassmakers, who specialized in bangles and beads, sold their products throughout Nigeria. They had their own market where they bought glass bottles, which they melted down for reuse, and where they sold their finished goods to traders and local consumers. Among other guild craftsman, weavers and beadmakers followed similar patterns. What Nadel demonstrated was that craft activity was embedded in a complex system of production and consumption that involved family members as well as traders and buyers from both neighboring and distant towns.

Besides the guild craftsmen, individual craftspersons were also part of the system. Pottery was largely made by women. In Bida, besides clay pots for cooking and storage, potters made clay lamps and small pitchers that Muslims used for their ablutions. Pots were also produced as components of systems such as the stacks of vessels that men and women used for storing clothing. One technique that some Nupe potters used was considered a secret and was handed down exclusively from mothers to daughters. Other womens' crafts included dyeing and weaving.

What is significant about the structure of Nupe crafts as Nadel described it, is that the actual work was embedded in a social system that involved numerous factors and had specific consequences. First, the standards of quality were shared by the craftsmen and the consumers. When craft producers were solicited to produce for the international market economy, the likelihood of lower standards increased as middlemen demanded volume production without a concomitant concern for quality. This was the case when indigenous craftspersons began to create objects for tourists. Removed from established networks of production and consumption, they started to produce what the anthropologist Nelson Graburn has called "tourist art."

Second, the craftsmen had close family or social ties to local consumers and personal relations with the traders who carried their wares to more distant markets. This reinforced the incentive for quality, while also embedding the objects within powerful systems of social exchange. Third, traditional ways of working were strong and change was resisted. Thus craftspersons were reluctant to modernize their practices to make them more efficient or increase their output, given that work methods were an integral part of their social identity. One exception was the enthusiastic adoption of the sewing machine, especially among young Nupe men. This mechanization of sewing was early evidence for Nadel of the modern industrial system in which the purchase of a sewing machine and its maintenance had to be factored into the cost of production.

Competition with African craftsmen came from the skilled Indians who began emigrating to East Africa, especially Kenya, before the colonial period. They brought with them long family traditions of working in tin, glass, wood, iron, and other materials. As Kenneth King notes, these families introduced an intermediate level of technology between the traditional crafts of the Africans and the mechanized techniques of the large foreign enterprises. They tended to improvise with tools rather than perpetuate codified traditional methods. They also had financial resources that enabled them to purchase necessary equipment and expand their workshops, and they were free to seek advantageous locations for their businesses without the obligation to remain within a kinship network. Consequently, they tended to settle in urban areas, where they could develop clients and markets for their products.

The Indian craftsmen hired Africans as apprentices and over time trained them in the techniques of their crafts. The Africans then set up businesses of their own, sometimes remaining in cities like Nairobi or Mombasa and sometimes returning to their villages. Among the more widespread industries were tinsmithing and blacksmithing. Indians originally made a number of different tin products in their workshops, most of which were intended for their own community. Among these were tin lamps and candle holders.

Despite the continued activity of craftsmen in communities throughout East and West Africa in the

1920s and 193os, competition from European imports was nonetheless a strong factor in transforming that activity. Commerce with Europe intensified by the 186os, due in part to the growing number of steamships that traveled back and forth between Britain and African ports. British shipbuilders learned to construct shallow-draught boats whose keels were close to the water line, enabling them to navigate the Niger River and similar waterways. In the late 19th century, British trading firms such as the Royal Niger Company received government charters to engage in import and export activity in West Africa. Eventually large trading companies bought up the smaller ones and by 1930 three major firms dominated West African trade with Europe—the United Africa Company, the Compagnie Française de l'Afrique Occidentale, and the Société Commerciale de l’Ouest Africain.

Their principal role was to distribute European consumer goods to African markets and to ensure that exports from Africa were sold in the industrial countries. They competed with African traders and showed little interest in training Africans in the techniques of modern business management. These companies also owned shares in European firms that provided products such as oil palm casks that Africans might have made themselves.

Adeline Apena notes the growing sophistication and variety of goods imported in Nigeria and describes how local people came to rely more on them, even though many of the imported products could easily have been produced at home had there been sufficient financial, educational, and technical support for the creation of local enterprises. Such products included kitchen utensils, radios, bicycles, and sewing machines. Poor quality was an issue with some imported goods, particularly the cheap cloth produced in British mills.

Imports were distributed through a complicated system that moved goods from middlemen to shopkeepers and petty traders in local markets. Distribution sites varied from a small European-owned department store in Nairobi to shops run mainly by

Middle Eastern or Indian immigrants. The Compagnie Française de l'Afrique Occidentale, one of the three large trading companies, had its own network of factoreries or trading posts, where it sold imported goods. These posts stocked a wide range of products and aimed to serve the diverse interests of their local clientele. Very few Africans could obtain the credit to manage shops of their own, and most were reduced to selling through small roadside market stands, which were called tabliers in French Africa

One European merchandising enterprise that failed was soap manufacturer William Lever's attempt to establish an equivalent of the British Woolworth stores. Around 1922, Lever opened a store in Lagos, Nigeria, where merchandise was displayed in open trays on counter tops. Prices were fixed and a cashier sat at the exit to take payment for the goods. However, African consumers did not respond favorably and Lever's store closed, unable to compete with the traditonal market stalls.

Scholars are divided on the extent to which European-imported goods destroyed traditional crafts. Anthony Hopkins, among others, refutes the assertion that crafts were eliminated in wholesale fashion. He concedes that the proportion of goods supplied by local craft industries declined, but he offers several reasons for the survival of craft practices. First, he notes that it was impractical to import goods from abroad that indigenous craftsmen could more efficiently supply to local markets. One can cite the manufacture of furniture as an example. In fact, the presence of so many foreigners-—colonial administrators, entrepreneurs, technical experts, and so forth—helped to create new markets for furniture, even without the decorative styles marketed by European manufacturers. Second, Hopkins points out that some African products were highly valued for their special qualities and competed well against imports of lesser quality. Here, one can mention iron pots, whose durability was greater than the cheaper imported ones. Hopkins also mentions products that established special niches and one can cite as examples the wooden headrests or ceremonial stools that were integral to numerous African tribal cultures. Finally, Hopkins observes that some crafts survived through the adoption of new techniques or equipment such as the sewing machine. He states as well that consumers did not uniformly substitute imported goods for local ones. Instead, they diversified their consumption, combining imports with locally made products. Hence the landscape of African production and consumption during the interwar period was more complicated than it appeared, given the multitude of different villages, towns, and cities where craftsmen worked and consumers traded or shopped.

One craft that did experience a noticeable transformation due to imports was blacksmithing. Traditionally, the production of ironware such as pots and tools involved smelting the iron ore as well as making the artifacts. Both were part of the blacksmith's trade. Smiths constructed blast furnaces, which varied greatly in design. Furnaces differed in size, depending on the amount of ore to be smelted. The furnace heat was controlled by bellows of several types that were made with wooden sticks or frames and goatskins. Smiths would take the molten iron direct from the forge and hammer it into the rough shape of an article. With the import of iron bars and implements, the need for smelting was significantly reduced because blacksmiths used the imported bars or melted down abandoned railroad ties or other types of scrap metal such as old cars.

Blacksmiths also faced stiff competition from imported hoes. Some found new sources of income making spare parts for cars and parts for looms. Kenneth King notes that blacksmiths in Kenya carried on a wide range of activities in the 192os and 1930s including work in sheet metal. He cites one workshop's shift from making hoes and plows to building bodies for trucks and lorries. By contrast, creating containers of various sorts from the calabash, a type of gourd, was cheap and involved minimal labor; hence these containers more successfully survived the competition from European ceramic and enamel vessels than did the iron goods of the blacksmiths. Because of their light weight, calabash containers were particularly valued by nomadic tribes. Calabashes of various sizes and shapes could be used for many types of vessels such as bowls, drinking cups, water jugs, and large containers for carrying produce on one's head. Calabash decoration was a distinct profession and calabashes were decorated with geometric motifs that varied from one village to another (Fig. 33.oi). Pottery and basketmaking, both enterprises that women practiced, also continued despite competition from abroad.

Like other crafts, boatmaking has a long tradition in East and West Africa and was widely practiced during the 1920s and 1930s. Writing in 1933, Robert Forbes observed native canoes or pirogues everywhere on the rivers and lakes of the region's interior. When a waterway was close to forest country, the canoes were dug out of single logs and transported from the forest to the coast. Elsewhere, they were made from boards that were joined together or constructed from a patchwork of small pieces of wood. Louise Jefferson made a distinction among boatmakers in the Gold Coast between the carpenters who shaped the canoes in the forests and the patternmakers who decorated the boats when they reached the coast.

The boats were propelled with poles in shallow water, and paddles where the water was deeper. Jefferson also described the elaborate ornamentation on boat paddles and fishing spears, particularly the motif of the python, which is a water spirit. While the wooden canoes remained effective for fishermen in the Gold Coast, other types of mechanized boats such as steamboats and barges that the trading companies introduced began to replace the locally crafted vessels, thus contributing to some reduction of the boatbuilding industry. The growing use of the new types of boats demonstrated a need for faster and more efficient river transportation to accommodate the increasing level of economic activity in the region,

Change occurred more slowly in agriculture, where farmers were especially opposed to it. They