studied woodcarving at the Berlin Applied Arts School, created a new Arts and Crafts Department where he worked to replace the Western-style art classes with courses based on local skills and traditional techniques.

Meyerowitz was also interested in developing enterprises based on craft skills. Shortly after his arrival he conceived a plan for an Institute of West African Arts, Industries, and Social Sciences, which was to combine traditional craft skills with modern technology to create small-scale enterprises. Among the activities considered for the Institute were printing, carpentry, metalwork, glass manufacture, and the use of forest products.

Before it received its initial funding from the Gold Coast government in 1943, Meyerowitz took a number of steps to get it started. Shortly after he arrived he hired the British potter Harry Davis (191o— 1986), who had worked with the Japanese-inspired Bernard Leach in England. Part of Davis's mandate was to research the possibilities of manufacturing various ceramic products. By the time he returned to England in 1942, Davis, with the help of apprentices, had built up enterprises for making bricks, tiles, glazed pottery, and ceramic water coolers. The tiles replaced makeshift corrugated iron as a roofing material, while the water coolers competed successfully against those imported from Germany. Davis was followed by another British potter, Michael Cardew (19o1-1983), who expanded the pottery's output to include glazed ceramic bowls to collect latex that the Nigerian rubber industry had ordered, as well as electric insulators and terracotta pots for one of the Gold Coast's Cocoa Research Stations. By the end of World War II, however, the institute had suffered considerable losses, resulting in the closure of the pottery. The institute itself was closed down in 1945, due largely to the suicide of Meyerowitz, who had been its most ardent champion.

## Manufacturing efforts

The attempt to create local craft enterprises at Achimota College was part of a larger effort, though not widespread, to start indigenous businesses that were independent of colonial support. A few Indian businessmen in East Africa such as Allidina Visram (1863-1916) became successful entrepreneurs, beginning in the first years of the 2oth century. Visram opened a number of shops to provide meals and other necessities to the builders of the Uganda Railway, which linked Kenya to Uganda. Beginning in Kenya, he extended his entrepreneurial interests to numerous cities and towns in Uganda, opening many shops and starting other businesses such as a leather tannery, sawmills, cotton ginneries, a soap factory, and furniture workshops. While none of these enterprises produced objects that were distinctive, they did provide opportunities for workers to gain experience with mechanized production and machine repairs and for craftsmen to make products for local consumers.

In Nigeria, economic difficulties caused by World War I induced the British to create a few tactories to produce goods that were otherwise difficult to import. One example was the sawmills that turned logs into cheap lumber, which was used for furniture. A carpentry workshop was established in Lagos to make furniture for all the government offices and number of other carpentry shops, fitted with imported power-driven machinery, used local lumber to produce wooden casks, doors, window frames, and furniture, all of which were previously shipped to Nigeria from Britain.

The Nigerian textile industry also flourished, producing durable hand-made cotton Kano cloth that was woven either with plain white or colored threads. The quality was high and many European expatriates bought it for tropical suits, riding breeches, and women's dresses. As an export, Nigerian cloth would have competed favorably in Britain with cloth made there, which was one reason why the colonial government did not support its manufacture as an industrial enterprise.

In 1912, W. Essuman Gwira (dates unconfirmed), an employee in the Government Agricultural Service in the Gold Coast, as Ghana was then known, invented a machine for small-scale palm oil processing. Cheap, easily manufactured, and simple to operate, it could have enabled more Africans to become involved in this enterprise. The Aborigines' Rights Protection Society, which was established in 1897 to press for the interests of Gold Coast natives, pressured the British government to invest in refining the machine for African use. The government refused, instead supporting processing concessions to the Lever Brothers, based on the claim that the local people were not yet capable of processing the oil themselves.

Threatened by more efficient palm-oil production in the Belgian Congo and Southeast Asia, the British government began to experiment with mechanizing its extraction. After 1922, various types of hand presses were investigated and the government eventually settled on the Duchscher press that was made by a firm in Luxembourg. Recognized for its low cost and large capacity, it was deemed superior to competing British brands. However, the number of presses in use, never more than several hundred, was not significant, considering the large number of palm-oil producers. Consequently the Duchscher press had only a modest effect on improving the output of the palm-oil industry.

Since the British government refused to fund the development of Gwira's invention, there is no way to know whether it would have competed successfully with the Duchscher press or perhaps surpassed its sales. As a locally designed and produced device, it would have demonstrated the ability of Africans to create new machines and might well have spurred related inventions that could have resulted in cheaper products and provided new entrepreneurial opportunities for Africans that would otherwise not have existed.

In Nigeria, the United Africa Company, which controlled more than 40 percent of the colony's exportimport trade after 1929, commissioned its Engineering Department to create an inexpensive hand press. In 1939, the department produced the Miller Hand Press, based on the principle of an old cylinder press. Given the government's concern that the impending war might cut off its supply of Duchscher presses, it adopted the Miller Hand Press. Further research by the UAC's Engineering Department led to a larger extracting machine that was known as the Pioneer Oil Mill. It was intended as an intermediary between the hand processes and the highly mechanized machines adopted by large companies like Lever.

Though a number of these motor-driven mills eventually came into use, their initial trial posed a number of problems. First, the oil extraction technique involved the loss of the palm kernels whose processing at least in Nigeria had always been the work of women. Hence, it cut women out of the process. The need to locate the mills near dense clusters of palm trees also placed them at a distance from many small producers. Motor transport was not available, nor could most producers afford bicycles. Thus trekking and head portage remained their only option. Operating the mills also required a high degree of technical skill, which none of the producers possessed.

It was not until after World War II that a small number of the mills were set up. Initially there was strong opposition to them, but a considerable number were in use by 196o. As Susan Martin notes, however, the mills created new jobs but significantly reduced the number of those who participated in the Nigerian palm oil trade as farmers and processors. Furthermore, the mills were dogged by the same problems as their predecessors: operating inefficiency, the high cost of spare parts, and a lack of skilled personnel to run and maintain them. In the end, they served to undermine smallholder participation in the palm oil industry.

The introduction of mills and other mechanized processing plants created opportunities for some craftsmen who migrated to centers where the mills and plants were located. There was work as well for mechanics to support the growing number of imported cars and buses and to repair the even larger number of imported bicycles. Old cars, broken machines, and other industrial waste also created opportunities for craftsmen to invent new forms of bricolage to make useful objects out of scrap materials.

Despite the French and British governments' reluctance to support indigenous manufacturing enterprises in East or West Africa, calls for economic development became part of the African rhetoric of political freedom. Given the difficulty of obtaining funds from banks in Africa, some would-be entrepreneurs looked to Americans, both black and white, for financial support, A number of African leaders, especially in British East and West Africa, were drawn to the ideas of Marcus Garvey, a Jamaican who had moved to New York in 1917 and founded the first American branch of his Universal Negro Improvement Association. The core of Garvey's argument was that racial greatness was predicated on starting enterprises, fostering trade, and becoming what he called a commercial and industrial people. He admired Booker T. Washington, who had founded the Tuskegee Institute in Alabama to teach artisanal and mechanical trades to young blacks. However, Garvey went farther than Washington, emphasizing entrepreneurship instead, which he believed was the path to black independence.

Garvey inaugurated a shipping enterprise, the Black Star Line, to move people and goods between the United States and Africa. He managed to acquire several ships but because of poor business practices the enterprise failed. Among other businesses he started were the Universal Printing House, the Negro Factories Corporation, and Negro World, his successful newspaper. The Negro Factories Corporation aimed to build factories in major American cities, provide jobs for African-Americans, and manufacture goods for an exclusive black consumer market. It did manage to run several successful businesses for a brief period but, like the Black Star Line, poor management and unrealistic goals brought about its demise. One African who sought to follow Garvey's example was Chief Alfred C. Sam (c. 1881–c. 193os), a Gold Coast resident, who went to Oklahoma in 1913 to sell stock in his Akim

Trading Company. Sam, like Garvey, purchased a ship, purportedly to transport American blacks to Africa, but, similar to Garvey, his enterprise was plagued by problems and it failed.

At the first session of the National Congress of British West Africa, which met in the Gold Coast in 192o, a call for economic self-determination was initiated. A British West African Co-operative Association was proposed, and banks and shipping facilities were promoted, as were the establishment of Cooperative Stores and buying centers. The man most responsible for attempting to move the congress program forward was Winifried Tete-Ansa (1889-1941), a businessman who was instrumental in founding several enterprises including a bank, the West African Cooperative Producers, and a corporation in the United States to buy cocoa and export manufactured goods to Africa that could be sold at affordable prices. These enterprises along with others such as the Nigeria Mercantile Bank, of which Crispin Adeniyi-Jones (1876-1957) was the president, were part of a program to improve opportunities for Africans in the British colonies. Though none of them achieved lasting success, they were significant as the inspiration for later ventures.

Other African leaders who called for economic liberation included J. B. Danquah (1895-1965), a lawyer and newspaper editor in the Gold Coast, who published a pamphlet in 1943 called Self-Help and Expansion in which he strongly argued that Africans in the Gold Coast had to manufacture and buy their own goods."We must industrialise our country," he claimed, which for him also meant taking over the importing and selling of foreign products. Danquah called for cooperative societies of producers and consumers in order to keep the profits from commercial activities from going abroad.

Danquah, Tete-Ansa, Adeniyi-Jones, and other strong advocates for African economic independence had large ambitions but lacked sufficient capital and expertise to realize them. Their strategy to organize