cooperatives made sense in that shared resources might have provided more leverage for small producers on the one hand and offered capital for new enterprises on the other. As in other parts of the developing world in the interwar period, import substitution was slow to develop, even slower in Africa because of a shortage of investment capital. Thus early indigenous enterprises such as small palm oil processing plants and factories that produced foodstuffs, beer and soft drinks, cigarettes, shoes, clothing, and furniture were mostly owned by Europeans. Technological products like radios, electrical appliances, and automobiles were imported until well after World War II and some until the present.

## French North Africa: Crafts and Commerce

In 183o, France occupied Algeria, a former province of the Ottoman Empire, followed by Tunisia, which had the same status. Tunisia became a French protectorate in 1881 as did Morocco in 1912. Unlike Britain, which fostered a policy of considerable autonomy for its colonies, France sought to align its colonial subjects with French values, assigning them set places within the hierarchy of the colonial empire.

Whereas Britain did not place a high priority on the development of the crafts in its East and West African colonies, French colonial administrators valued craft production, although they were intent on wresting it from the autonomous control of the local guild systems and integrating it into a program of training and production that was guided explicitly by French interests.

In Algeria and Morocco, as Roger Benjamin and Hamid Irbouh have shown, early craft policies were prominent in the larger strategies of colonial governance. In 19oo, Charles-Celéstin Jonnart assumed the post of Governor-General in Algeria. He developed a plan for the craft industries, which exemplified his concern for preserving Algeria's native heritage. Shortly after he took office, Jonnart commissioned Marius

Vachon (185o-1928), a specialist in decorative arts reform, to survey the arts industries in Algeria. Vachon returned a positive assessment, countering those who predicted the demise of local handicrafts due to mechanization and competition from foreign products such as the counterfeit metalwork from Germany and the contraband carpets smuggled into Algeria from Tunisia and Morocco.

Jonnart also commissioned a second inquiry into the native arts from Arsène Alexandre (1859- 1937), a prominent Parisian art critic who reinforced the importance of strengthening local handicrafts. However, Alexandre thought that traditional apprenticeships were less effective than academic instruction in drawing, a practice that would pull craft training out of its indigenous locations in the workshops of the Arab medinas and relocate it to schools where students would be taught with French methods of instruction.

Jonnart sponsored a team to collect pattern books for carpets and embroidery and traditional recipes for textile dyes. The intent was to distribute these to various workshop schools for young boys and girls, where they would serve as the basis for new creations. In 19o8, Jonnart established an Office of Indigenous Arts, and Prosper Ricard (1874–1952), an expert on North African architecture and decorative arts, was hired to run the office's Cabinet de Dessin. Its task was to document with photographs and drawings traditional craftwork from around Algeria, especially architectural details and quality handicrafts. The documentation was then distributed to workshops whose students were instructed in ways to produce decorative art based on the models they were shown.

Jonnart also initiated vocational craft schools where student apprentices worked with master craftsmen. In 1924, the government inaugurated the Oeuvre d'Artisinat, which helped indigenous craftsmen throughout Algeria to become self-employed.

Following the Algerian example, French officials in Tunisia also launched a number of vocational schools for women. Early schools revived a dying tradition of local embroidery. As in Algeria and later in Morocco, Prosper Ricard served as an advisor to the government. In 1914, the government founded an Institute of Arts and Crafts in order to modernize the craft industries, and in 1929 it created a fund to financially assist local craft cooperatives.

Jonnart's attempts to preserve the decorative arts in Algeria by codifying models for students to copy served as a precedent for Louis-Hubert Lyautey, who was Governor-General of Morocco from 1912 to 1925. Lyautey, similar to Jonnart, believed in preserving the traditional native crafts. He also adhered, as Jonnart did, to the associationist theory of colonial rule, whereby local "subjects" were encouraged to maintain their own way of life within a French administrative structure but without the privilege of attaining the full rights of French citizenship. Hence, Lyautey supported the preservation of Moroccan crafts, but sought to integrate them into a French system of production that would ensure a steady stream of craft goods that could be sold abroad.

As did Jonnart, Lyautey also commissioned a report on the traditional arts. One conclusion of the report was that Moroccan craftsmen had experienced declining levels of production due to competition from European imports, many of which were of cheaper quality such as the machine-made carpets from Britain. With the aim of opening the Moroccan market to French products and absorbing Moroccan industries into the French economic system, Lyautey organized the Casablanca Franco-Moroccan Fair in 1915. The fair presented products of local industries in separate pavilions that represented the medinas in different regions. The artifacts on display included carpets and blankets, inlaid wood, sculpted and painted wooden furniture, and silver jewelry. An exhibition of drawings by Moroccan children convinced the French authorities that they could establish schools to teach young people to become high quality craftsmen.

With the aim of developing products for foreign markets, the French government set up offices in Rabat and Fez to improve the quality of different indigenous crafts. Under the guidance of Prosper Ricard, museums were established in several cities to display replicas of older objects. Government craft inspectors commissioned works from the best artisans and also set up state workshops, where expert craftsmen were given salaries and were provided with materials. Inspectors also sought out examples of the best older carpets that could serve as models for future production. This proved to be an effective strategy, which resulted in carpets that were much admired at several exhibitions in Paris.

Prosper Ricard supervised the production of a massive catalog of Moroccan rugs, which was published as a set of four volumes between 1923 and 1934. Roger Benjamin notes that the books were intended to promote a high quality of carpet production within limits that conformed to French industrial policy for the colonies. He states that the reorganization of the carpet industry boosted sales but marginalized the more quirky rugs of irregular design, which could not obtain the official government seal to qualify them for export.

In 1918, as Hamid Irbouh writes, Lyautey established an Office of Native Craft Industry, which was intended to centralize all activities related to the production of Moroccan crafts for sale abroad. Ricard and a team of assistants traveled throughout Morocco encouraging artisans to participate in the renovation of their industries by urging them to copy examples that had been judged most appropriate for commercialization. The Office of Native Crafts also created workshops and exhibited the results in local galleries.

In the early 192os, the French administration created the Casablanca School of Fine Arts to train Moroccan high school graduates for careers in the applied arts. Courses were dictated by the construction needs for the villes nouvelles (new towns) that were being built for French and European settlers. Consequently, while European students studied fine art in preparation for taking the exam for the École de Beaux Arts in Paris, the Moroccans were channeled into craft courses, where