towards mining, farming, and the lumber industry. During World War I, Southern Rhodesia made great headway in import substitution, with factories that produced footwear, clothing, soap, and cigarettes along with foodstuffs. Responding to military demand, factories began to manufacture smoke bombs, airplane parts, and a range of light-engineering products. Largescale European immigration after the war created an impetus for further industrialization, particularly in housing construction. Sawmills produced lumber and furniture manufacturing flourished, although no distinctive designs emerged. Factories also fabricated metal doors and windows, along with other housing components.

A 1938 census of manufacturing recorded approximately 3oo enterprises, though most were still on a small scale. Prior to 194o, the government had remained neutral towards industry, allowing private enterprise to fuel industrial development. However, wartime shortages induced the prime minister to take a stronger role, and an Industrial Development Advisory Committee was established in 1940. By 1942, the government began to promote state enterprise as the principal means of industrialization, resulting in the nationalization of various industries and the decision to make semi-finished products that could then be sold at low prices to private companies for finishing, so that they could compete more successfully with imported goods. By the end of the colonial period, South Africa had one of the largest industrial sectors in Africa.

## Graphic design

During the early 2oth century, African cultures were still predominantly oral, hence printing and publishing were limited, though they continued to expand in the interwar years. Africans were involved with the transcription of oral languages, which included the creation of syllabaries, while African design was centered on a few newspapers and the occasional magazine. By contrast, European graphic design that involved Africa took three forms. First was design directed at Africans, such as packaging and some newspaper advertising. Second was design directed at Europeans, especially travel posters, brochures, and other literature related to African tourism. Third was packaging and advertising directed at Europeans that used African imagery.

These three forms displayed varying degrees of positive or negative images. Design directed to Africans such as labels for cotton bales had generally positive depictions, although Africans were seen in positions that were subordinate to whites. In travel advertising, Africans were initially portrayed as exotic and sometimes primitive, although in later North African advertising posters they were depicted more sympathetically. Finally, images of Africans in European advertising were often derogatory and outright racist.

## Scripts and syllabaries

The production of texts, first by hand and then by mechanical means, has a long history in Africa, despite the multitude of oral languages spoken by tribal groups across the continent. Through the spread of Islam over many centuries, numerous Africans, particularly across the Sahara and in West Africa, learned to read and write Arabic. When the French occupied North Africa they encountered a highly developed Arabic print culture. In other parts of Africa, local languages were sometimes written in Arabic script. In Ethiopia, Amharic existed as a vernacular language for centuries before the ancient Ge'ez script was adopted as its written form (Fig. 33.07).

Presses were established for various purposes. The dominant purpose was to spread Christian doctrine, which was done by various missionary societies and associations. A few missionaries went to Africa in the isth century, but missionary activity became more intense in the late 18th century and continued through the 19th and into the 2oth. Other groups who set up presses were foreign enterprises as well as colonial governments. The Sierra Leone Company, which traded in agricultural products, imported a press as early as 1794. Among the titles that such commercial

L.aoa+ emr o

..

n小今

A-NA.A-1 3-

1.9800.910-9=80:8+5年n40da.气ae…b

n4 bn+ 2A16 h-n oe

AOA OIL CA+nAL aTCh chD AC94= ?.Nu SA.ohugAhEh CA

Fig. 33.07: Ge'ez Bible, 18th century. © Robert Preston/Alamy.

enterprises published were the Angolan periodical O Comercio de Loanda (1867), and in Mozambique and in South Africa, the South African Commercial Advertiser. These publications, however, represented foreign commercial interests and did not arise from the local cultures around them.

Portugal was perhaps the first colonial government to establish official printing presses in its colonies. The aim was to make it easier for local administrators to publish their own laws and official papers instead of having them printed in Lisbon. In 1836, the Portuguese government issued a decree stating that local presses should be set up in the colonies in order to publish Boletins Oficiais (Official Bulletins) as well as other documents. The decree was not fulfilled until 1842, when the first press was established in Cape Verde, followed by one in Angola in 1845 and another in Mozambique in 1854.

The spread of European languages came from various sources, particularly colonial administrations that necded low-level clerks to staff their offices and for whom teaching the language of the colonizer was a way of integrating the native into the colonial system. With little tolerance for native languages, for example, French colonial administrators put great emphasis on teaching French in colonial schools. Consequently, early literary efforts by African writers such as Ahmadou Mapaté Diagne, who published Les trois volontés de Malic (The Three Wishes of Malic) in 192o, were in French. Diagne's novel was perhaps the first in that language by a black African.

Mission presses emphasized the publication of books, tracts, pamphlets, and periodicals in native idioms. In Southern Africa, the Wesleyan Methodists and the Congregationalists introduced printing presses at mission stations among the Tswana in the interior, and Xhosa speakers in the Cape Colony, while the Anglicans brought presses to several stations in the 186os and 187os. The Methodists produced the earliest known Southern African newspaper, Umshumayeli Wendaba (Publisher of the News), between 1837 and 1841. Ikhwezi (Star of Morning), a Bantu journal, appeared in 1844.

In the later part of the 19th century, two major centers were important for the promotion of indigenous South African mission publishing: Lovedale in the Cape Colony, where the Presbyterians established the Lovedale Mission Press in 1861; and Morija in Basutoland, where the Paris Evangelical Missionary Society inaugurated the Morija Printing Works in 1874. While the Lovedale Mission Press printed materials mainly in English and Xhosa, the missionaries at Morija published books, pamphlets, and periodicals in as many as 45 languages for colonies throughout Sub-Saharan Africa. Although the primary purpose of the early native-language publications was to propagate Christian doctrine, as George Ayiki Alao notes, they also prepared the way for the development of an indigenous secular African literature, as exemplified by Thomas Mfolo's novel in the Sotho language, Chaka, which the Paris Evangelical Missionary Society published in 1925. In Nigeria, a Yoruba publication, Iwe Irohim (The Journal), came out in 1859, only a few years after the Yoruba language was given a written form in roman script by a freed slave, Samuel Crowther (1809–1891), in order to translate the Bible

Although the first printing press was brought to Ethiopia in 1863, it was the establishment of a government press by Emperor Menalik II in 19ı1 that provided a major impetus for the development of printing there. Menalik's inauguration of a state printing press was just one part of his broad project of modernization that included the construction of bridges and modern roads, the erection of telegraph lines, the creation of a national bank and postal system, and the opening of a hospital, a Western-style school, and a hotel, Menelik's intent was to use the press for printing official documents as well as books that would contribute to Ethiopia's development.

Menelik II died in 1913, and subsequently Haile Selassie served as regent from 1916 to 1930, at which time he became Ethiopia's emperor. In 1923 he founded his own press on the palace grounds. Known at the time as the Regent's Press, its name was later changed to Berhanena Salam (Light and Peace). Selassie intended the press for the publication of newspapers and books. It also included a lithographic department for the production of printing blocks. The press brought out numerous religious books in both Ge’ez and Amharic, along with documents for public and private organizations as well as newspapers. The staff of 3o consisted entirely of Ethiopians. At the time of the Italian invasion in 1935, there were seven printing presses in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital. These included the government press founded by Menelik II; Berhanena Salam, which had been established by Haile Selassie; and five other presses that were privately owned.

In general, the books, pamphlets, newspapers, and other publications that were printed in Africa before World War II displayed little or no sense of design. Illustrated works were rare and printers tended to handle the page layouts according to the most conservative typesetting conventions. Type was imported from abroad and there was a limited range of fonts to choose from. Paper also tended to generally be of low quality.

Besides the translations of oral languages into roman scripts, such as the project of Samuel Crowther, or translations into the Arabic alphabet, there were also projects that Africans initiated to create syllabaries consisting of phonetic symbols. Saki Mafundikwa has described a number of these. The Bantu syllabary in South Africa contains symbols that are both phonetic and pictographic, including representations of family members, warriors, chiefs, and planters, as well as abstract concepts like gossip, war, or passion. In 1921, a Somali scholar Yaasiin Cismaan Kenadiid (1919–1988) created a syllabary for the Somali language, although it