was never widely used. Other syllabaries were invented by individuals such as Kisimi Kamara (1890–1962), a Muslim tailor in Sierra Leone who created one with 195 characters for the Mende language in 192ı; Woyo Couloubayi (dates unconfirmed), who is credited with the invention of a syllabary for the Bambara language in 193o; Wido Zobo (dates unconfirmed), who invented one for Loma in Liberia in the 193os; and Chief Gbili (dates unconfirmed), who created another for Kpelle in Liberia, also during the 193os. One of the older written scripts called Vah belongs to the Bassa people in Liberia, who developed a written syllabary that was originally used to elude slave traders. After a decline, it was revived around 19oo by Thomas Gbianvoodeh Lewis (dates unconfirmed), a Liberian chemist, who set up schools to teach it.

Perhaps the most extensive publishing program that made use of a syllabary was created in the Bamum Kingdom in Cameroon, originally a German colony, at the end of the 19th century. King Ibrahim Njoya (dates unconfirmed) and his councilors not only invented a writing system, but used it to produce a large number of manuscripts in which the king recorded the history of his people. He also created a calendar, maintained administrative records, and wrote a book that Saki Mafundikwa compares to the Kama Sutra, all using the system of writing known as Shü-mom. The king was assisted in his endeavors by a group of talented artists who created images to complement his texts, recalling the manuscript tradition of the European Middle Ages. When the French took over Cameroon from the Germans after World War I, they destroyed the printing press that King Njoya had invented, decimated his libraries, and burned many of the books he had written.

## Newspapers and magazines

Compared to the size of the African population, newspapers published in the 19th and early 2oth centuries reached comparatively few readers. Prominent publishers were the missionary societies for whom editing newspapers in native languages was an important part of their effort to reach the local people. Their publishing activities, which included the aforementioned books and pamphlets as well as newspapers, went hand in hand with the schools they established to teach literacy along with other subjects.

In South Africa, missionary societies were the first to publish newspapers in African languages and thereby became the progenitors of a native African press. Umshumayeli Wendaba (Publisher of the News), printed at the Wesleyan Missionary Society between 1837 and 1841, was the first newspaper to be published for black readers. It spawned numerous others that were independent of the missionary societies. In 1884, John Tengo Jabavu (1869–1921), a prominent politician and educator, founded Imvo Zabantsundu (African Opinion), a newspaper written in the Xhosa language and the first to be controlled and written by blacks. Jabavu's paper, however, was established with white backing, and although he demanded equal rights for the black population and became a proponent of women's rights and public education, his critique of white rule was consequently rather mild.

Other pioneering black newspaper editors included Solomon Tshekisho Plaatje (1876-1932) and John Langalibalele Dube. Fluent in at least seven languages, Plaatje wrote in English but was also concerned with the preservation of the Setswana language, compiling its first phonetic reader. He was also part owner and editor of Koranta ea Becoana (Bechuana Gazette).

To publish the paper, Plaatje established the Bechuana Printing Works, which involved purchasing a press and hiring printers. After the Gazette foundered, he became owner and editor of two other papers, Tsala ea Becoana (Friend of Bechuana) and Tsala ea Batho (Friend of the People), which also lasted for limited periods. Plaatje, like other black editors, participated actively in the struggle of blacks in South Africa against injustice, particularly opposing segregation and unfair land distribution. He was elected the first

Secretary General of the South African Native National Congress, which was renamed the African National Congress in 1923.

In 1903, John Langalibalele Dube co-founded the first Zulu newspaper, Illanga Lase Natal (The Natal Sun), which he later edited. As mentioned previously, Dube was a great admirer of Booker T. Washington, the American black leader, and like Plaatje, he was a founder of the South African Native National Congress and became its first president. As Les Switzer notes, the early black papers faced extreme difficulties and rarely lasted for extended periods. They did not have adequate printing equipment, had to draw on a modest pool of skilled black printers, and lacked the more extensive distribution networks of the white press. Nonetheless, they survived for various lengths of time and prepared the way for the more militant black papers that were to appear in later years.

The readership of the early black press was largely middle class, the same audience that was targeted by the publishers of Bantu World, a weekly paper that first appeared in 1932. Modeled on the British tabloids, Bantu World was founded by a white man, Bertram Paver, who owned the paper along with some black investors for a year until a white-owned publishing conglomerate, the Argus Printing Company, took it over. Controlled by the mining industry, Argus dominated most of the black press in South Africa through its ownership of ten weekly papers.

Shortly after its founding, Bantu World introduced a woman's page, which featured an ongoing debate about the characteristics and qualities of the modern African girl. The paper ran beauty competitions and published photographs of the leading contenders It was one of the first newspapers in South Africa, or in Africa for that matter, to incorporate photographic images. Besides news, Bantu World published poetry short stories, and plays, as well as drawings by African artists. Whereas the earlier black papers had been run by one or two people, Bantu World, which had national distribution, maintained its own editorial, advertising, and printing departments, where many blacks gained professional training as printers, typists, clerks, salesmen, and also journalists.

Among the more radical papers was Workers' Herald, an irregular publication that appeared in four languages. It was launched in 1923 by the Industrial and Commercial Workers' Union, which had become the most important black political organization by the late 1920s.

There were as well numerous papers published for white South Africans in English and Afrikaans. Most of them, such as the Rand Daily Mail and the Sunday Times, which were first published at the beginning of the 2oth century, were connected with the mining industry. They appeared almost 1oo years after South Africa's first newspaper, the Cape Town Gazette and African Advertiser, which was owned by two slave dealers and first came out in 1800.

Few of these papers broke new ground in their layouts or. typography. Besides Bantu World, several other papers were beginning to experiment with pictorial journalism by 193os. Among them was Umlindi we Nyanga (Monthly Watchman), a Xhosa-English monthly that first appeared in 1934. It was published by a company in London that manufactured goods for the South African market. Though initially an advertising vehicle for the company's products, it was revived after World War II as a pictorial magazine that featured news photographs, drawings, and cartoons.

In the British colonies of East and West Africa, black entrepreneurs had more opportunities than in South Africa to start their own newspapers. Among the colonies where newspaper publishing prospered were the Gold Coast, Sierra Leone, Uganda, and Nigeria. Many editors of these papers were supporters of pan-African nationalism and a number were inspired by Booker T. Washington, W. E. B. Du Bois, Edward Blyden, or Marcus Garvey, especially Garvey's newspaper, Negro World. In the Gold Coast, Joseph Casely-Hayford co-founded the Gold Coast Leader, which was published between 1902 and the

193os. In Sierra Leone, J. Claudius May owned the well-produced Sierra Leone Weekly, Ernest Beoku Betts established Aurora, and Isaac Wallace-Johnson, the radical labor activist, founded The Sentinel. In Nigeria, 51 newspapers were launched between 1880 and 1937. Among the first was John Payne Jackson's Lagos Weekly Record, which early on took an anti-imperialist stand. An important contemporary publication was the Lagos Standard, founded by George Alfred Williams, who had learned the art of printing as a young boy. Like Jackson, Williams also took a strong anti-imperialist position and was likewise influenced by Edward Blyden's pan-Africanism. Some years later, in 1937, Dr. Nnamdi Azikewe, also a strong proponent of pan-African ideas, founded another Nigerian paper, the West African Pilot. Other papers such as the Nyasaland Times and the Uganda Argus were owned by Europeans and reflected the voices of the white settlers in East Africa. In 1916, the Niger Company along with other European trading firms invested in the West African Publishing Company, which brought out a periodical journal, West Africa.

Few indigenous newspapers were published in the French colonies, as the French government maintained tighter control of the local press than did the British. Publications in native languages were also discouraged, hence the few newspapers that were published in these colonies tended to be in French. Among them was La Démocratie du Sénegal, founded in 1913. In North Africa, where Arabic was widely spoken and written, several papers appeared. In 1907, a reformist group known as the Young Tunisians began to publish a political newspaper, Le Tunisien (The Tunisian), in French. Two years later, an Arabic edition was started. In Fez, Morocco, L'Action du Peuple (Action of the People) was founded in 1933. The spread of communist activity to North Africa inspired a number of publications such as the Algerian journal La Lutte Sociale (Social Struggle) and communist propaganda published by Robert Louzon's Tunisian printing press, which included some material in Arabic that attempted to demonstrate points of agreement between communism and Islam.

In Ethiopia, newspapers were published in several languages. Those in French included Le Courrier d'Ethiopie (Ethiopian Courier) and L'Ethiopie Commerciale (Commercial Ethiopia). There was also an Italian paper, Il Notizario (The Bulletin), that was established in 1933 and espoused a Fascist line, and four newspapers in Amharic including the weekly Berhanena Salam, a quasi-official paper that supported the views of Emperor Haile Selassie.

In the Portuguese colony of Mozambique, João dos Santos Albasani (1876–1922) was a founder in 1908 of O Africano: Almanach Humorístico e Ilustrado (The African: A Humorous and Illustrated Almanac), a weekly newspaper that was aligned with the political association Grêmio Africano. O Africano published articles that were critical of the Portuguese government, along with literary pieces and political cartoons. The inclusion of cartoons distinguished this paper from most others in Africa. It lasted until 1918, at which time Albasani started a new publication, O Brado Africano (African Voice), which published many of Mozambique's young writers. Elsewhere in the Portuguese colonies, the literary magazine Claridade (Light) first appeared in Cape Verde in 1936. It was a modernist publication that was part of a movement for cultural and political emancipation on the island. The founders Manuel Lopes, Baltasar Lopes da Silva, and Jorge Barbosa established high literary and linguistic standards, intending to free writers in Cape Verde from the weight of Portugal's literary tradition. The magazine was indicative of the political unrest that existed in Cape Verde during the regime of the Portuguese dictator António Salazar in the 193os. It was one of the few publications in all of Africa during the interwar period to assimilate the typographic experiments of the Western avantgarde. The cover of the first issue displayed a hierarchy of type sizes and weights, with the title, consisting of hand-drawn expressive letters, placed at the bottom and the titles of three poems indicated in bold type