that contrasted with the rest of the cover text. While the graphic image of their magazine was not as experimental as its counterpart publications in Europe, the editors nonetheless recognized that an innovative visual design was consistent with their attempts to forge a modern Cape Verdean literature. Nine issues appeared between 1936 and 196o, but only three were published before World War II.

## Advertising, logotypes, and packaging

African artists created few graphic images during the period before World War II. As described in an earlier section, indigenous art education was limited and few Africans went abroad to study art. One exception to the lack of local advertising art was South Africa, which was the rare nation or colony on the continent to create a modern consumer economy. As in Europe and the United States, early South African pictorial newspaper advertisements featured stock woodcuts or simple line drawings, as well as ads with a mix of display types. Photographs began to replace line drawings in the 192os. Advertisements in the white-run newspapers and magazines depicted white people as consumers, even if blacks also purchased some of the products advertised. One exception to the depiction of white men and women in product ads was the advertising for Bon Ami cleanser. Directed at white consumers, it was exemplified by an ad that portrayed a smiling black servant cleaning a bathtub.

Publications that blacks edited also incorporated advertising. Initial ads in Bantu World for the Apex Hair Company, an American firm that marketed cosmetics to black consumers, featured a light-skinned black woman, most likely drawn by an American illustrator, while later ads produced by the company incorporated photographs of South African women. Bantu World also depicted black men favorably in ads for skin creams and face powder (where the men were expected to buy the products for their lady friends). These products were manufactured by a white-owned company that sold cosmetics made especially for blacks.

Although there was a considerable number of advertising agencies in South Africa by the 193os, advertising copy and illustration tended to be derivative of what was being produced in Great Britain and the United States. There were some local artists and photographers, but it is likely that European or American advertising illustrators created many of the drawings included in advertising for products, particularly those that were imported from abroad such as Singer sewing machines, Telefunken radios, and Gecophone record players.

European artists were responsible for other types of advertising in Africa before World War II, notably the trademarks and logotypes that the trading companies adopted, either to characterize their own identities or to brand the goods they imported. Trading companies chose visual icons that most often had some African reference. Their intent was to become part of the system of symbolic representation in which African chiefs participated. As Frederick Pedlar notes, animals identified many African tribes, while kings also had their own signs such as the Ashanti gold stool and the pot with holes that was the emblem of King Gezo in Dahomey. To express solidarity with his African trading partners, John Walkden adopted King Gezo's emblem for his own Lagos Stores, thus reinterpreting the original meaning that Dahomey could not survive unless its children worked together, each one stopping up a hole. As the emblem could be read according to Walken's appropriation of it, the European trading company was purported to be an integral part of Dahomey's survival.

Other emblems or symbols that European trading companies adopted included the lion's head, associated with the firm of Richard and William King; the unicorn, first selected by F. and A. Swanzy and then by G. B. Ollivant, a company that eventually settled on a horseman and rider; and the boar's head, adopted by W. B. MacIver in southern Nigeria. Several firms appropriated indigenous African symbols as their marks. Jurgen Colonial Products, for example, adopted