of the upper case letters in relation to the lower case. These gave Kabel a more decorative than standardized quality. The decorative aspect of the typeface was also accentuated by Klingspor's release of Koch's Zeppelin, an inline companion to Kabel in 1929, and a striated version called Prisma in 1931.

In 1923, several years before he designed Kabel, Koch created a thick san serif black letter alphabet called Neuland for which he cut the punches himself. The rough shapes of the letters recall the irregular lines of medieval woodcuts, a reference that is suggested when the letters form a block of text. Unexpectedly, Neuland became a popular advertising typeface and found a welcome reception in Britain and the United States. The heavy black letters assumed a racial overtone when the British Monotype Corporation named its own version of the typeface Othello, after the darkskinned lead character in Shakespeare's play of the same name. In Germany, the Bauer Foundry made an even more overt racial reference when it called a similar face, designed by Lucian Bernhard, Negro. Other novel faces that were used primarily for advertising purposes were Beton, a heavy neo-Egyptian alphabet designed by Heinrich Jost (1889–1949), typographic director of the Bauer Foundry, and Georg Trump's City, of 1931, an eccentric interpretation of a rectilinear Egyptian style.

Trump (1896–1985) studied with F. H. Ernst Schneidler (1882–1956), who taught lettering at the art academy in Stuttgart. He was one of Schneidler's most successful students, who also included the typographers Imre Reiner (1900-1987) and Walter Brudi (1907- 1987). Schneidler, who had studied with Peter Behrens and F. H. Ehmcke in Düsseldorf, taught at the art academy from 192ı to 1949 and is said to have created a "Stuttgart school" of typography. Central to his teaching was the idea that typographers should study graphic disciplines besides calligraphy and that each discipline should influence the others. This is evident in the variety of typefaces created by his former students. Trump, for example, ranged from City to a black letter of 1935 called Deutsch, a three-dimensional Egyptian face called Shadow of 1937-1945, and a condensed serif with an inordinately high x-height called Signum that he designed in 1955. Between 1929 and 1934, Imre Reiner, who moved to Switzerland in 193ī, designed Corvinus, which he derived from 19th-century modern faces, as well as other faces that were based on script lettering.

## The New Typography

Jan Tschichold (1902-1974) was the chief promoter of the New Typography (die neue typographie), a set of principles and rules for modern graphic design. Tschichold studied calligraphy and classical typography in Leipzig at the Staatliche Akademie der Graphischen Künste (State Academy for the Graphic Arts), whose director was the typographer and book designer Walter Tiemann (1876–1951). In 1923, Tschichold visited the previously mentioned Bauhaus exhibition in Weimar and was transformed by the modern design he saw there. A strong influence was Moholy-Nagy's essay on the New Typography in which Moholy declared clarity to be the principal aim of typography, designated photography as the most precise means of illustration, and urged the liberation of the typographic line. The innovative books that the Russian artist El Lissitzky published in Berlin, About Two Squares and For the Voice, also influenced Tschichold. Like Lissitzky, whose typographic innovations were related to his multi-directional Proun paintings, Moholy derived his own typographic principles from his work as a Constructivist artist. Tschichold cited both Lissitzky and Moholy-Nagy as precedents for his principles of elementare typographie (elementary typography) that he first enunciated in a special issue of the German printing journal Typographische Mitteilungen (Typographic Communication) in October 1925. Tschichold's ten principles echo Moholy-Nagy's claims that the New Typography should be purposeful, but Tschichold then added specific rules that forbade the use of ornament and mandated that all type should be san serif and composed in asymmetrical arrangements. To support his