sweets, cigars, and tobacco. These trolleys consisted of a wood framed box with glass panels that sat on a frame which supported the wheels (Fig. 34.o1). Such objects, which combined wood and metalwork as well as glass cutting, could be easily manufactured in small workshops that employed craftsmen with diverse skills.

Craft practices in the villages remained almost unchanged. Local craftsnen accepted raw materials from their customers and charged them for the labor to create a product. By contrast, the growing number of small and medium-sized workshops in the urban areas adopted a more entrepreneurial approach, whereby they sought to market finished goods rather than simply charge for their labor. One factor that urban craftsmen had to face, however, was the decline in demand for high-quality work. This was particularly noticeable in crafts such as wood and ivory carving and working in metal. The decline was due to diminishing commissions from the royal courts and an increase in demand for cheaper goods from the growing urban populations.

Gadjil defines four stages in the development of urban craft workshops. Instrumental to this process was a new type of entrepreneur, who could provide artisans with capital or materials as needed. In the first stage, the entrepreneur furnished the necessary resources but did not buy the finished goods. In the second, he supplied resources, then bought the finished products and marketed them. In the next stage, the businessman provided the raw materials and paid the artisan on a piece-work basis for the finished goods. In the final phase, he brought the artisans together in a small factory and managed both the production and sale of the products they made.

When one considers the many forces that affected the status of the traditional crafts, whether at the village level or among the highly skilled craftsmen who worked for the luxury market, it is evident that competition from British mass-produced goods was only one of many factors that caused the traditional crafts to decline. Another was the shift from rural craft practices to small and medium-scale urban workshops, which introduced new forms of entrepreneurship that addressed a market rather than an individual customer. However, what inhibited the majority of these smaller workshops from developing into larger factories was the absence of existing markets, due to widespread poverty on the one hand and a lack of technical expertise and capital on the other. The development of factories was not in the best interest of the colonial administration, hence economics became conjoined with politics as Indian activists took steps to improve the conditions required for industrialization while also fostering a movement of self-sufficiency to produce goods locally and resist foreign ones.

## The swadeshi movement

A number of factors made the process of industrialization far more difficult in India than it had been in Europe or the United States. Most significant was the competition from British manufacturers, who preferred that India remain a market for their goods rather than become an economic competitor. This attitude was reinforced by the British Raj, which at times halfheartedly promoted industrialization but managed in ways both subtle and obvious to subvert it.

There was little capital within India to finance large-scale enterprises. The majority of wealthy Indian princes, who retained their opulent lifestyles even under British rule, were not interested in industrial development. Instead, they funded enormous palaces with luxurious interiors, many of which British firms and designers created. Numerous educated Indians with upper-class backgrounds but lesser means believed that business was beneath their station and they were likewise not inclined to engage in entrepreneurial activity. Familiarity with how industrialization had altered the landscape in Britain also contributed to ambivalence about introducing the factory system to India. Thus, support for industrialization had to compete with the belief that a resurgence of native crafts would more effectively lead to economic