independence. Even R. C. Dutt, an early proponent of industrialization and a prominent economic historian, stated in his impressive Economic History of India of 1902-1904 that he believed Indians to be ultimately better off working in their own fields or at their own looms than laboring for a landlord or as wage-earners in large factories.

By 19o3, swadeshi, or self-reliance, a movement that had first emerged in the late 19th century, had begun to spread, particularly in the state of Bengal, where it was fueled by the British decision to partition the region into two sectors in 19o5. This prompted a call to boycott British goods and led to a large number of initiatives to create and market indigenous products. The swadeshi message was actively promoted by the ardent nationalist Satish Chandra Mukherjee (1865-1945) through his journal Dawn, which he founded in 1897 and edited until 1913, and the Dawn Society, which held classes and seminars between 1902 and 1907.

Swadeshi activists did not adopt one strategy only. Some thought in terms of starting new industries, while others favored strengthening local craftspeople. Beginning in the 189os, efforts were made to promote indigenous goods through exhibitions and shops such as the Swadeshi Emporium, which had been set up in 1891, and the Indian Stores, founded a year later. By 1905, the year of partition, the number of swadeshi shops in Calcutta had increased considerably.

Among the swadeshi products that sold well in the shops were cutlery, porcelain, and some items of clothing. The medium-sized Calcutta Pottery Works was one of the few successful Bengali enterprises. With imported machinery and a skilled ceramist who had studied in Japan, the factory advertised swadeshi teacups, saucers, and teapots as well as additional items. Other competitors were less successful due to undercapitalization and a lack of skilled workmen. Several entrepreneurs announced plans to manufacture bicycles but could not attract the resources to begin production and resorted instead to importing and repairing them. The most successful swadeshi efforts were several cotton mills, although they barely scraped by due to a shortage of capital.

By 19o8, Bengali entrepreneurs, discouraged by a paucity of manufacturing success stories, shifted their interest towards services such as banking and insurance, although these businesses too had trouble raising operating funds. In general, the swadeshi movement in Bengal failed to produce the economic renaissance that its leaders had initially hoped for. Part of the problem was that the educated Bengalis were not able to mobilize the massive village population to support the movement. But swadeshi did condition many Bengalis to think in terms of economic independence and helped prepare the way for Mahatma Gandhi's powerful campaign beginning in the 192os to resist the British Raj by weaving khadi cloth instead of buying British cotton.

## The Orientalists and craft romanticism

Like his fellow arts administrators, John Lockyard Kipling and George Birdwood, E. B. Havell (1861– 1934) also stressed the value of Indian design and craftsmanship when he was Superintendent of the Art School in Madras between 1884 and 1891. At the school, he championed the revival of traditional handicrafts and introduced practical courses to improve them. When he was named Principal of the Calcutta Art School in 1896, he took a more radical position, initiating reform of the curriculum that eradicated the distinction between the fine arts and the crafts and made Indian art the basis of instruction. As keeper of the Calcutta Art Gallery, Havell removed most works of European art and replaced them with Indian examples.

To quicken the development of the cotton industry in Bengal, Havell began promoting the fly-shuttle loom around 19o2. Invented by the Englishman John Kay (1704-c.1779) in 1733 and a major force in the Industrial Revolution, this loom enabled the craftsman to speed up the weaving process and significantly increase production. Nationalist leaders embraced the new looms and set up a number of schools to train youth from Bengal's elite social class to use them. Havell too established a training center, the Central Weaving College, thus marking a moment where his own romantic view of Indian crafts intersected with the Indian nationalists’ attempt to produce their own goods instead of patronizing British merchants. By 1908, however, the attempt to introduce fly-shuttle looms had achieved little success, as the upper-class Indian youth lost interest in weaving and native weavers found the looms to be too expensive.

Due to health reasons, Havell returned to England in 19o6 but continued to promote and write about Indian arts after his return. In 1912 he published a book, The Basis for Artistic and Industrial Revival in India, in which he put forth a patronizing view of swadeshi, arguing vigorously against indigenous cotton mills and factories, celebrating village craftsmen, and denigrating mill owners, factory workers, and shopkeepers. Like other British arts administrators who promoted craft education, he believed that industrialization had brought moral and physical depravity and degradation to the large commercial cities of Europe. As one antidote, he cited a Dutch industry that was producing handkerchiefs, neckties, and related items that were made with the traditional lost-wax process that had been imported from Java.

Havell's vision of an India free of industrialization's horrific effects relegated Indians to a life without technology, neither telephones nor automobiles nor the "Swadeshi gramophones" that would signal the doom of Indian civilization should there be factories to make them. To be fair, Havell did not espouse a repressive view of Indian economic development, but he refused to consider a future for India that might require relinquishing the spiritual ideals he believed to be part of the nation's heritage in favor of an industrial process that would wreak havoc on the heritage of indigenous artisanry he so much admired.

Havell's anti-industrial views were shared by Ananda Kentish Coomaraswamy (1877-1947), an Anglo-Ceylonese scholar of south Asian art and a friend of Charles Ashbee and others connected to the Arts and Crafts movement. In 1907, Coomaraswamy moved to Chipping Campden, where Ashbee had founded the Guild of Handicraft, an Arts and Crafts workshop, five years earlier. During the time he spent there before traveling to India in 191o, Coomaraswamy and Ashbee shared many discussions about the negative consequences of industrialization.

One result of this friendship was Coomaraswamy's 1909 book The Indian Craftsman, for which Ashbee wrote the introduction. Projecting onto India all the ideals he felt Europe had lost, Ashbee foresaw the eventual disintegration of what he called "the great city of mechanical industry" and claimed that India possessed a fundamental and enduring order that was far more admirable. Like others who imagined a nation of peaceful villages populated by craftsmen who were fulfilled in their work, Ashbee ignored the colonial context in which Indians lived, as did Coomaraswamy, a patrician himself, who condoned the caste system, which ensured the continuity of distinct craft traditions even as it perpetuated wide disparities of privilege. Coomaraswamy further romanticized Indian craftsmanship by claiming that craft expertise originated in the divine skill of an Indian god, Visvakarma. In his assertion that the Indian craftsman was blissfully free of the struggle for existence that oppressed the working man in Britain, Coomaraswamy ignored the dynamic structure of the Indian craft economy, which had resulted in a significant move by craftsmen from villages to towns and cities as well as the activity of small entrepreneurial workshops which had become necessary for the craftsman's survival.

Following his arrival in India, where he remained from 1910 to 1913, Coomaraswamy began to engage more directly with the realities of Indian social and political life. In Art and Swadeshi, a collection of essays he published in 191, he criticized the goods he found in swadeshi shops, noting their deterioration from earlier aesthetic standards as well as their poor quality and high price. Like William Morris, he equated beauty with