he differed from them in his recognition that an idyllic society of serene village artisans could not exist unless the British departed and India became an independent nation.

## Industrialization: the British policy

Lord Curzon, Viceroy of India between 1899 and 1905, who considered himself a promoter of Indian industrialization, established a Department of Commerce and Industry in 19o5, though he was also known for his statement that the vast majority of Indians were only trained for agriculture and would never be fit for anything else. This contradiction typified the position of the British Raj towards industrialization in India and exemplified its preference for a colony that consumed British goods rather than made its own, much less marketed them abroad in competition with Britain's national interests. In fact, Curzon's short-lived department was of primary benefit to an elite group of British entrepreneurs as well as Indians who were favorable to the Raj.

Although colonial administrators like E. B. Havell instituted reforms in Indian art schools and promoted revivals of local craftsmanship, the various agencies of the Raj that required professional design and engineering services consistently favored British personnel. The government ordnance factories that made weapons hired mechanics and artisans from England, thus reducing the opportunities for Indians to gain comparable training, while a principal problem in developing a cadre of local engineers capable of handling complex projects was that large government engineering contracts were rarely offered to Indians and therefore few entered the profession.

Mention has already been made of the government's sparse patronage of Indian firms that manufactured railroad locomotives and carriages. Similarly, the government met most of its other material needs—supplies for the Indian and British police; water, gas, and sewage systems; hospital equipment; and even stationery for administrative offices—by purchasing the required goods in Britain and shipping them to India. Through its policies of giving preferential treatment to British goods and services, the Raj maintained the message that these were superior, even when there were clearly Indian professionals and entrepreneurs who could have provided local equivalents, and at a considerably lower cost.

Alfred Chatterton (1866–1958), a young British engineer who came to India in 1888 to teach in the College of Engineering at the University of Madras, was one of the rare British colonials who promoted Indian industrialization, even though he did so at the level of small and medium enterprises. Chatterton worked with the provincial government of Madras, becoming the Director of Industrial and Technical Inquiries when the Madras government established a full-fledged Department of Industries in 1906.

With a government grant, Chatterton began a program in 1898 at the Madras School of Art, where E. B. Havell had once been the principal, to design and manufacture household vessels of aluminum, then a relatively new material for industrial use. The program was a success and prepared the way for private enterprise in Madras. It led to the establishment of the Indian Aluminum Company by Eardley Norton, a strong supporter of the Indian National Congress, and stimulated the creation of other enterprises that were based on existing craft skills, including a tannery where water buckets, shoes, and sandals were manufactured using the industrial technique of chrome tanning, which involved treating the skins chemically. Based on Chatterton's employment of chrome tanning, it was widely adopted in India. Chatterton also helped to establish the Salem Weaving Factory, which produced shawls, cotton goods, and silk cloths.

Although Indians in the region welcomed the Madras Department of Industries, it raised alarm among British businessmen who saw the emerging enterprises as unwarranted competition. As a result of their protests, Lord Morley, then Secretary of State for India, closed down the department in 191o and