discouraged the establishment of any pioneering industries supported by the Madras government. Chatterton subsequently left Madras and became an advisor to the government of Mysore.

In 1912, he published in Madras a collection of essays entitled Industrial Evolution in India. His espousal of industrialization based on craft skills was a foil to Havell's and Coomaraswamy's romantic adulation of the individual craftsman. Like them, Chatterton recognized the harmful effects of the factory system in Europe and proposed a different direction for India. Instead of large factories, he supported the development of small and medium-scale firms that would adopt what he called a judicious combination of men and machines.

Chatterton believed that Indian artisans should have access to all the instruments of success—capital, organizational skill, and appropriate tools. While his espousal of Indian entrepreneurship, even on a small scale, went against the grain of the typical British businessman in India, he was nonetheless a staunch proponent of British rule, skeptical of swadeshi politics, and convinced that Indians would always need the British to set high standards of service.

There was considerable Indian opposition to Lord Morley's decision to abolish the Madras Department of Industries, and consequently the Raj backtracked to some degree. By 1914, Madras had established a new department, as had Bengal and several other provinces. When World War I began, India was cut off from foreign imports and a surge in demand arose for products that were produced domestically. This stimulated a number of industries including cotton production, leather tanning, and shipbuilding. As a response to the situation, particularly the need to strengthen Indian production capacities, the British government established an Indian Industrial Commission in 1916. Its mandate was to explore the possibilities for further industrial development in India and lay the groundwork for a permanent industrial policy. After extensive research, the commission produced a final report in 1918, concluding that the British government should play a more active role in the country's industrial development.

Among the specific recommendations were the establishment of provincial Departments of Industry that would be coordinated by an Imperial Industrial Service; improving technical education; and providing technical and financial aid to demonstration factories in emerging industries. However, the British did not sustain a national position on industrialization and, despite some successful initiatives, provincial governments were not given sufficient resources or incentives to pursue the ambitious program that had been outlined in the commission's report. Failing to forcefully implement the commission's recommendations, which would have significantly increased state support for new and struggling local enterprises, the government fell back on its earlier policy of economic laissez-faire, which favored more experienced British enterprises and reinforced the difficulties of newlyestablished Indian businesses to compete with them.

In a 1929 book, The Economic Development of India, the British economist Vera Anstey argued that despite some isolated industrial successes, India had not achieved anything that might be called an industrial revolution even though a potential to develop new industries existed. Arguing that India still suffered serious financial, technical, and labor deficiencies, she called for a British industrial policy that would have included financial aid, technical training, and intensive promotion of improved production methods, but such a policy did not come to be. Consequently, the few major industrial achievements of Indian entrepreneurs during the interwar years were due primarily to their courage and perseverance, which defied the British government's proclivity to protect its own interests first and foremost.

## Industrialization: the Indian response

At its annual meeting in 19o1, the Indian National Congress concluded that the decline of indigenous crafts, caused by the incursion of British industry, was at the root of Indian poverty. Nonetheless, by that time most Indian nationalists had determined that India would need to build its own industrial system. This was easier said than done given the numerous obstacles that faced the country. Unlike the industrialized countries, no infrastructure was in place to foster industrial development. Not only did India lack a culture of technological invention such as existed in Britain or the United States, but there was also a severe shortage of capital as well as skilled professionals to perform design, production, and managerial tasks. In fact, the abundance of human labor reduced incentives to replace workers with machines. Besides, neither machines, the electrical energy to power them, nor the repair facilities and replacement parts were as readily available in India as they were abroad.

In 19oo, the Indian National Congress created an Industrial Committee and the following year began to include an Industrial Exhibition as a part of each meeting. An important stimulus to industrial enterprise was the Association for the Advancement of Scientific and Industrial Education, which was founded in 1904. Its principal mission was to raise funds to send Indian students abroad for technical education. It did manage to provide a number of scholarships and some of the students started enterprises when they returned. In opposition to the educational policies of E. B. Havell and other British art educators, nationalists also criticized the art school emphasis on elevating the cratsman's skills. They claimed that India already had enough trained artisans, and they called instead for more technical education to foster the establishment of large-scale factories that would employ designers and engineers to produce domestic products that could compete with British imports.

In 1905, as the activities of the earlier Indian Industrial Association waned, a new organization, the Indian Industrial Conference took over the association's mission to promote industrialization within India.

With the economic historian and activist R. C. Dutt as its first president, the members presented papers at an annual meeting in conjunction with the Indian National Congress. Dominated by Western-oriented Indian businessmen, however, it sidestepped the more militant swadeshi activism that pervaded Bengal during the first years.

Despite the lack of trained Indian industrial designers and engineers, a number of small to mediumsized enterprises were established in the interwar years to produce goods that were based more on mechanical than artisanal processes. Though most such enterprises lasted only a short time, a few did become successful. India Steel & Wire Products Ltd made wire nails. barbed wire, and related merchandise. The first major factory for glassware, the Paisa Fund Glass Works, was established around 1908 in the city of Talegaon, located in the province of Maharashtra. It exemplified perfectly a strategy of resistance by amassing small investments from local farmers and employing an Indian chemical engineer who had studied in the United States at MIT. Due to the attention it paid to training its workers, the Paisa Fund Glass Works spawned a number of other factories that were founded by former employees. These included the United Provinces Glass Works, which was India's largest by 1936, and the Ogale and Bombay Glass Works, both located in the Bombay area. A budding glass industry also developed in Firozabad, a city in the province of Uttar Pradesh, where 15 factories were set up between 1925 and 1931 to manufacture glass beads and bangles. Some progress was also made elsewhere in the manufacture of lamps.

Due to the impact of the swadeshi movement, the province of Bengal had a considerable number of such enterprises. Though extremely popular in India, sewing machines were mainly imported from abroad. In fact, Gandhi, who opposed most industrial products, praised the Singer sewing machine. In 1935, the Jay Engineering Works, a small firm founded in Calcutta that year, began to experiment with the production of its own sewing machine, which it planned to market under the brand name Usha. In 1938, the industrialist Lala Shri Ram (1884-1963) took over the company. Four years earlier he had acquired the Bengal Pottery Works, an enterprise initiated by the Maharaja of Kasimbazar in 1907, which had been languishing until Shri Ram made it profitable. Other Bengali enterprises included the Bengal Waterproof Works Ltd, set up in 1920 to manufacture rubberized "Duckback" products; the Bengal Electric Lamp Works, founded in 1932; the Calcutta Fan Works, created in the 193os; and the India Flashlight Manufacturing Company, which was established in 1933.

Due to difficulties already outlined, few companies were inaugurated on a large scale. Of these, the Tata Iron and Steel Company (TISCO) was by far the most successful. Although it was a producer of steel rather than finished products, TISCO acquired and developed a number of subsidiaries that did produce industrial goods made of steel or which included steel in their manufacture. Within the history of mass production in India, TISCO is highly significant because for many years it was the rare Indian company that adopted the business model of vertical integration demonstrated by American manufacturers like Westinghouse, John Deere, and Ford. Thus, TISCO was able to produce finished products based on material that it manufactured itself.

The Parsi businessman Jamshetji Nusserwanji Tata (1839-1904) started planning the company in 1899, although TISCO did not begin manufacturing steel until 1907, three years after his death. Tata sought funding unsuccessfully from British sources and consequently raised all the operating capital in India from a combination of family investments and modest sums acquired from a large number of supporters. The machinery came from Germany and the initial group of experts was American. At first, TISCO was managed by Tata's oldest son, who oversaw the establishment of a planned company town, Jamshedpur, where the factory, worker housing, and other facilities were located. In 1921, TISCO management opened the Jamshedpur Technical Institute, which trained Indian students for both managerial and high-level technical jobs. This facilitated the gradual elimination of foreign personnel and the eventual staffing of most positions with Indians. In 1927, the company started an Apprentice School, which trained personnel for the line jobs as welders, machinists, blacksmiths, pattern makers, and so forth. TISCO's ability to staff almost all its positions with Indians within two decades of its founding was a stinging rebuke to all the stereotypes held by British administrators regarding the unsuitability of Indians for industrial ventures.

Similar to large corporations abroad, TISCO developed or acquired a group of companies that were intended to produce goods made of steel, though few of these achieved notable success. The aforementioned India Steel & Wire Products Ltd, which began in the 193os, was the successor to a company that had collapsed in the prior decade. The Peninsular Locomotive Company was unsuccessful until World War II, when it began to manufacture armored vehicles with steel plates. The Agricultural Implements Company (Agrico), which TISCO acquired, had originally been created to produce hand tools primarily for the extensive agricultural market, but despite the solid design of its products, it never became very successful because it had to compete with the myriad local blacksmiths and small enterprises that manufactured rival implements more cheaply with scrap metal. Most successful was the 'Tinplate Company that was formed in 1922 jointly with a Scottish firm, Burmah Oil, to produce the tin sheets for the firm's oil containers as wel as tins for tea and biscuits. While TISCO did not train industrial designers as such, all of its manufacturing companies required design, which was most likely done by engineers or other employees assigned to such tasks.

Despite the less than impressive showing of TISCO's subsidiaries, the overall success of the steel mill inspired other Indian entrepreneurs to think about enterprises on a large scale. In 1935, a group of