industrialists met in Bombay to discuss the establishment of an automobile factory. Following an initial wave of enthusiasm, a 1936 report by an Automobile Factory Committee expressed doubts, which were reinforced by the Raj's reluctance to provide any support. However, several projects were initiated independently of the committee, one led by the industrialist Seth Walchand Hirachand (1992-1953) and another by Ghanshyamdas Birla (1894-1983). In 1942, the Birla group established Hindustan Motors Ltd in Calcutta, while Walchand formed Premier Automobiles Ltd in Bombay two years later. Because of the war, neither could begin production until peace was declared when, due to lack of expertise, each had to find a foreign partner with whom to collaborate, despite their mutual ambition to inaugurate a home-grown automobile industry as a sign of India's industrial progress.

Not one to think small, in 194o Walchand also founded Hindustan Aircraft with assistance from Mirza Ismail, a high-ranking official who represented the King of Mysore. Walchand's aim was to manufacture airplanes for the Indian Air Force. The undertaking was short of capital, thus he sold his stake. The Kingdom of Mysore refused to follow suit, although due to a lack of experience, it decided to yield management control to the British. After independence, the new Indian government nationalized the company and it played an important role in modernizing the Indian Air Force. Eventually, it became one of the largest aerospace companies in Asia.

Tata, Walchand, and Birla were all bold entrepreneurs who acted on the belief that lndia would need to compete with the already industrialized nations once it gained independence. In a speech of 1943, Walchand expressed his longing for the day when India would have its own automobiles, airplanes, buses, locomotives and railway coaches, ships, and all the products of an advanced industrial culture that the country still had to import. For him, India's ability to design and manufacture its own products would ensure the alleviation of poverty and the arrival of prosperity for everyone. While inordinately hopeful, Walchand nonetheless equated industrialization and the capacity for mass production with social improvement, a connection that envisioned Indian capitalism as social betterment for all rather than the accumulation of riches for the few.

## Typography, publications, and advertising

At the beginning of the 2oth century, literacy was still restricted to a limited segment of the Indian population. With the establishment in the 192os and 193os of S. S. Brijbasi, a publisher of lithographic prints in Karachi, and other publishers, the print culture inaugurated by the Calcutta Art Studio, the Ravi Varma Studio, and others in the 19th century was greatly expanded, thus ensuring the continued traffic in cheap printed chromolithographs of mythological figures.

Besides the popularity of these images, however, the publication of reading matter also expanded. Type fonts were available in most if not all indigenous languages, and presses existed throughout the country, producing a wide range of materials from official documents to newspapers, books, and magazines. India's linguistic diversity was extensive, despite the large number of Hindi speakers and the prevalence of the Devanagari script. Artists invented new forms of lettering for posters and other printed matter, but India in these years was not a sufficiently developed commercial culture to warrant more extensive activity in type design. The Linotype company introduced a typesetting machine for Bengali in 1935, but did not make machines for·other Indian scripts until after World War II.

The printing historian B. S. Kesavan estimates that more than soo newspapers and journals were being published at the beginning of the 2oth century. Among these was the illustrated journal Modern Review that the Bengali Ramananda Chatterjee (1865-1943) published, beginning in 1907. Modern Review, which appeared in English, promoted nationalist views and quickly attracted a nationwide readership. It featured