featured scenic destinations, including a number of temple sites. As fodder for the tourist gaze, Indians were always included as part of the scenery. In some posters they were dwarfed by the impressive monuments, while in others, such as posters that depicted the Khyber Pass or the holy city of Benares, their activity was an essential part of the narrative. The poster artists were all British and included Austin Cooper and Fred Taylor, who had both done posters for the London Underground and the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER), along with William Spencer Bagdatopolos (1888— 1965) and Victor Veevers (1885–1968) among others. Cooper's poster for Amber, a city in Rajasthan, depicts a maharaja sitting atop an elephant parading through the city as part of a public spectacle that was calculated to attract tourists (Plate 73).

## Indian lm posters

The first film advertisement appeared in the Times of India in 1896 to promote the cinématographe, which the French Lumière Brothers had introduced in Paris only a few months before. Seventeen years later, in 1913, D. G. Phalke produced, directed, and edited the first Indian feature film, Raja Harishchandra, a mythological drama whose visual style Phalke adopted from Ravi Varma. He came to know Varma's paintings when he worked in the artist's print studio in 19o5. Phalke founded the Hindustan Film Company in 1917 and it was soon followed by others—Dhiren Ganguley's Lotus Film Company, Baburao Painter's Maharasthra Film Company, the Prabhat Film Company, Bombay Talkies, and Wadia Movietone. The largest number of studios was in Bombay, which became the center of the Hindi film industry, but there were other studios in south India, notably in Madras, which developed as the center for films made in the Tamil language.

Early film advertising included painted banners, cut-outs, and posters. Printed handbills were also distributed from decorated bullock carts that were drawn around the towns and villages where the films were shown. Initially the handbills consisted of simple typefaces, but more decorative fonts along with illustrations were introduced as printing technology improved. Beginning in the 192os, posters and handbills were supplemented by a new form of advertising, the film booklet, which contained pictures as well as a summary of the film. The cover images and those inside became particularly important aspects of the promotional strategy, as they represented to the distributors and the public the film's content and visual style.

One of the earliest printed film posters and among the first to depart from the Ravi Varma aesthetic was Baburao Painter's Kalyan Khajina (The Treasures of Kalyan) of 1924. Painter (1890–1954), who was the film's director as well as its poster designer, adopted a pictorial strategy, already widely used for 19th-century theater posters, of featuring a crucial moment in the drama. In the case of Kalyan Khajina, it is the moment when the emperor Shivaji discovers some crates of treasure and encounters a woman instead of the anticipated coins (Fig. 34.o8). Painter sought to imitate the realistic style of Bombay's J. J. Šchool of Art, where so many artists who did advertising posters had trained. But he was an untrained artist whose style was not as refined as the art school poster designers such as Bide Viswanathan (dates unconfirmed), who came to prominence in the post-war years. Given the J. J. School of Art's proximity to the new film studios, it is not surprising that so many of the industry's poster designers studied there.

Though many studios tended to produce cheap posters without regard for visual quality, artists who learned to paint in the J. J. School of Art's realistic style helped to improve the aesthetic level of film publicity. Those who came into the industry with no art school training learned on the job by painting lettering for the advertising hoardings and absorbing other skills. D. G. Pradhan (dates unconfirmed) designed publicity for Wadia Movietone, which was founded in 1933 after the introduction of sound films two years earlier. To compensate for his lack of formal art training, Pradhan studied informally with a J. J. School of Art student, M. R. Acharekar (1907–1979), who later became deputy