Development of India (1848–1939). Vera Anstey, The Economic Development of India, written in 1929, contains helpful information but looks at India's economic history from a colonial point of view. Judith Brown, Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope is a thorough biography of the Indian leader. S. Balaram's article "Product Symbolism of Gandhi and Its Connection with Indian Mythology," Design Issues 5, no. 2 (Spring 1989) offers an explanation of how Gandhi manipulated symbols for political ends, while Susan S. Bean, "Gandhi and Khadi, the Fabric of Indian Independence," in Annette B. Weiner and Jane Schneider, eds., Cloth and Human Experience addresses Gandhi's connection to this material. Information on E. B. Havell and Ananda Coomaraswamy can be found in various sources including Debashish Banerji, "The Orientalism of E.B. Havell," Third Text 16, no. I (March 2oo2); Roger Lipsey, Coomaraswamy: His Life and Work; and Vishwanath S. Naravene, Ananda K. Coomaraswamy. Their own books, particularly Havell's The Basis for Artistic and Industrial Revival in India and Coomaraswamy's The Indian Craftsman and Art and Swadeshi reveal much about the two men's attitudes towards Indian crafts and their resistance to industrialization. Similarly, Alfred Chatterton, Industrial Evolution in India offers an extensive explication of his views. Amin Jaffer, Made for Maharajas: A Design Diary of Princely India contains ample documentation in words and images of the maharajas' involvement with architecture and design. Jaffer also wrote an article on "Indo-Deco" in Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton, and Ghislaine Wood, eds., Art Deco 1910–1939, the catalog of the Art Deco exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum.

Information on Indian graphic design has to be pieced together from various sources. Christopher Pinney is an expert on Indian print culture and has written a number of valuable books and articles on the subject including "Photos of the Gods": The Printed Image and Political Struggle in India and the article, The Nation (Un)Pictured? Chromolithography and Popular’ Politics in India, 1878-1995,” Critical Inquiry

23, no. 4 (Summer 1997). See also Anindita Ghosh, Power in Print: Popular Publishing and the Politics of Language and Culture in a Colonial Society, 1778–1905. Kajri Jain's Gods in the Bazaar: The Economies of Indian Calendar Art has some useful material on commercial art but like Pinney she writes mainly about prints. Rachel Dwyer's and Divia Patel's Cinema India: The Visual Culture of Hindi Film has an excellent section on the first Indian film posters. Books about Indian art in this period also have material related to commercial print culture. See Tapati Guha-Thakurta, The Making of a New "Indian" Art: Artists, Aesthetics and Nationalism in Bengal, c. 1850-1920; Partha Mitter, Art and Nationalism in Colonial India, 185o—1922:Occidental Orientations and Much Maligned Monsters: History of European Reactions to Indian Art; and Pushpa Sindar, Patrons and Philistines: Arts and the State in British India, 1773–1947. Also useful are the catalogs of Indian visual culture that Neville Tuli edited for Ossian's: A Historical Epic. India in the Making. 1757–195o: From Surrender to Revolt, Swaraj to Responsibility; A Historical Mela: The ABC of India. The Art, Book and Cinema; and India: A Historical Lila. Auctions of Indian Modern & Contemporary Paintings, Drawings and Graphic Art.

The exhibition catalog Made in Hong Kong: A History of Export Design in Hong Kong, 1900-1960 is a good source of information on Hong Kong design and manufacturing, while Simon Go's Hong Kong Apothecary: A Visual History of Chinese Medicine Packaging has helpful material on medicine package design. Sherman Cochran's Chinese Medicine Men: Consumer Culture in China and Southeast Asia is the best account of Aw Boon Haw and other regional entrepreneurs.

## Books

## General

Clark, John. Modern Asian Art. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1998.

Cochran, Sherman. Chinese Medicine Men: Consumer Culture in China and Southeast Asia.