were usually propelled by a boatman with a pole (Fig. 35.02). These vessels were made primarily from traditional designs in small to medium-sized workshops. By 191, small steamships and steam launches also transported goods along Chinese waterways, but they were far outnumbered by the junks and sampans that carried most of the nation's inland trade.

## Art education and the 1925 Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs

During the Qing dynasty, manufacturing occurred primarily in the arsenals and little thought was given to training designers for a consumer market. In the republican period, more attention was paid to consumer goods, but the goods turned out by most Chinese factories were copies of foreign models. While design training was not a priority for the leaders of the new republic, it was nonetheless included in the movement to modernize art education that began after Sun Yat-sen took power in 1911.

An early pioneer in this movement was Cai Yuanpei (1868-1940), who served briefly as Minister of Education under Sun Yat-sen and Yuan Shikai. While in this position, Cai began to actively promote art training and declared aesthetic education to be one of his five principles of pedagogy. As chancellor of Peking University, beginning in 1917, he proposed that aesthetics replace religion as an expression of spiritual and emotional value. Cai was very much involved in the New Culture Movement of 1917-1923, which adopted a critical stance towards traditional Confucian values and urged a different culture that incorporated Western political, artistic, and scientific ideas.

While living in Paris in 1924, Cai was honorary chairman of an exhibition of Chinese art, calligraphy, and crafts, which was held in Strasbourg. For him, the exhibition was an opportunity to promote the new engagement of young Chinese artists with Western culture, but it had little impact on European audiences; nor did China's exhibit at the Exposition des Art Décoratifs the following year. Along with the United

States, China was one of two invited countries that declined to participate officially, which, in China's case, was due to its unsettled political situation. However, two associations of Chinese artists in Paris did organize a display for the exhibition, which consisted mainly of traditional Chinese decorative art that had been gathered from a number of antique dealers and importexport houses.

By 1928, after his return to China, Cai had again become an important educational leader within the Guomindang, and in 1928 he founded China's first national art academy, along with Lin Fengmian (1900-1991), a Chinese painter with a Western orientation. Located in Hangzhou, far from Peking where the expression of liberal ideas on culture and politics had become dangerous, the National Academy of Art offered classes in design as well as Western and Chinese painting and sculpture.

Lin Fengmian, the school's first director, shared Cai Yuanpei's view that aesthetic experience was central to modern life. He was exposed to the latest currents in modern art when he lived in France and Germany. In France, he had been one of the organizers of the Chinese exhibit at the Paris expo in 1925. He continued to promote modern forms of expression at Hangzhou, while also educating students in traditional Chinese art practices. Several professors in the design department had studied in France and consequently they introduced the Art Deco style to the curriculum. It was evident in some student decorations for lacquerware as well as in lettering designs and advertising illustrations that were published in several popular Shanghai magazines.

In Shanghai, the painter Liu Haisu (1896–1994), who, like Lin Fengmian, was oriented to Western art, opened a small art school in 1912, and by 1921 it had expanded to become the Shanghai Academy of Art. The school, which was the largest in the city, offered programs in handicrafts and commercial art along with courses in Chinese and Western painting among other subjects. Its design department was headed by