advance from a vanishing point to convey a sense of movement and drama (Plate o9). Like the Soviet avant-garde designers, Tschichold limited his color pallet mainly to black, red, and white and made use of photographs rather than illustrations, which set him apart from most German graphic designers at the time.

In 1928, Tschichold published his most important book Die Neue Typographie (The New Typography), in which he explained in detail how his principles could be applied to all forms of graphic design including letterheads, posters, envelopes, bills, business cards, and logotypes. Typography played a much more important role for him than it did for other commercial artists, and the New Typography, which replaced "elementary typography," strongly challenged the heavy reliance on drawn images that German commercial artists preferred.

Tschichold presented the New Typography as a total method for graphic design, although his own emphasis on typographic rather than pictorial solutions derived from his training as a typographer rather than as a painter or illustrator. He functioned as a mediator between the avant-garde artists who inspired his thinking and the wider professions of typography, book design, and commercial art that were exposed to his ideas through the mainstream printing journals and design magazines. Tschichold's principles were controversial and were questioned or opposed by many practitioners.

There was, however, a cadre of designers, many of them artists, who embraced the New Typography and applied it in their own practices. These included Max Burchartz (1887-1961), Johannes Canis (1895-1977), Walter Dexel, Johannes Mohlzahn (1892-1965), Willi Baumeister (1889-1955), César Domela (1900-1992), Kurt Schwitters, and Anton Stankowski (ī906-1998), In 1924, Burchartz, a former painter who was influenced by Constructivism and De Stijl, and Canis founded werbebau, Germany's first studio for modern graphic design. Located in Bochum, a town in the industrial Ruhr area of Germany, they worked extensively for firms involved in heavy industry, particularly the Bochumer Verein für Bergbau und Gussstahlfabikation (Bochum Association for Mining and Cast Iron Manufacture), a firm specializing in metal parts of all kinds. For this client, Burchartz and Canis designed catalogs that used photographic product fragments and photomontage to present the range of parts the company produced. Burchartz moved to Essen in 1927 to develop courses in modern graphic design, photography, and advertising at the Folkwangschule, a school of applied arts. One of his outstanding students was Anton Stankowski, who relocated to Switzerland in 1929, where he became a founder of the Swiss style of "constructive" graphic design.

In 1928, Kurt Schwitters founded the ring neuer werbegestalter (circle of new advertising designers), a group of designers who adopted the New Typography and techniques of the new advertising, particularly photomontage. From its founding until 1931, the "ring" actively promoted modern graphic design through numerous exhibitions that circulated widely in Germany and occasionally abroad. The members also organized the publication of Gefesselter Blick (Focused Gaze), the most important survey of new advertising design to be published in the Weimar period (Fig. 21.25).

When the Nazis came to power, they associated the New Typography and advertising with left-wing internationalism. Tschichold was branded a cultural Bolshevik and managed to emigrate to Switzerland, where he continued to teach and work as a freelance designer. The New Typography spread to other countries, notably the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Czechoslovakia, where it continued to develop during the 1930s.

## The illustrated press

During the 192os, the mass media in Weimar grew at an exceptional pace and Germany had more illustrated newspapers and magazines than any other country in the world. By 1928, photography had replaced drawings