## Publishing and the May Fourth Movement

The dramatic rise of publishing as a consequence of the May Fourth Movement brought about new opportunities for graphic designers, particularly the chance to create covers for the myriad books and journals that appeared. Many of these publications also resulted from the New Culture Movement, which was initiated by the journal Hsin ching-nien (New Youth), an influential periodical that began publication in 1915. Although New Youth was founded to promote broad philosophical ideas about science and progress, it initially served as a vehicle to oppose the politics of Yuan Shikai and the warlords who followed him. Influenced by the Russian Revolution, New Youth began to promote Marxism as part of its philosophy and from 192o it supported the fledgling Chinese Communist Party. The magazine was shut down in 1926.

The movements for political and cultural change after the establishment of the republic made a great impact on literature and consequently on the physical appearance of books. Central to the literary reformers was the substitution of vernacular speech, known as pai-hua, for the stilted classical prose of Qing dynasty writers. There was a renewed interest in popular culture including folk tales and folk songs as well as visual patterns from traditional textiles and forms derived from stone sculptures. The cultural nationalism inherent in some of the new writing was also evident in the design of book and journal covers.

The best-selling popular literature, known as the "Mandarin Duck and Butterfly School," may be contrasted with the more serious attempts of the New Culture writers to create fiction that characterized China as an emerging modern nation. The New Culture authors often combined a romantic temperament with a desire to ground their stories in realistic situations. Unlike Japan, avant-garde literary theories, whether Expressionist, Futurist, or derived from Dada, were of little interest to Chinese authors who were more concerned with their own subjective experience than with the pure aesthetics of literary form.

A number of the new writers originally joined together in groups to promote their ideas. Two of the most influential groups were the Literary Association, formed in 192o, and the Creation Society, founded a year later. In 1921, the Literary Association arranged with the Commercial Press to edit one of its publications, the Short Story Magazine, which the literary scholar C. T. Hsia notes was the primary journal for the development of modern Chinese literature until the early 193os. The Short Story Magazine featured striking graphic covers as did Creation Monthly, the rival publication of the Creation Society.

It was through Creation Monthly that the fin-de-siècle artist Aubrey Beardsley, whose sexually provocative drawings had shocked Victorian England, was first presented to China's literati. Beardsley's decorative style was adopted in China by a younger member of the Creation Society, Ye Lingfeng (1905– 1975), who became known as "China's Beardsley." Ye's interpretation of Beardsley aroused the ire of Lu Xun (1881–1936), China's most influential writer during the republican era. Lu had a strong interest in English book illustration and appreciated Beardsley's intricate drawing style. However, he disliked Ye's imitation of it.

Cai Junpei had put Lu Xun in charge of cultural affairs when he headed Sun Yat-sen's Ministry of Education in 191. Lu was energized by the New Culture Movement and began to publish short stories, which were the first to be written in a Western style. As much a scholar as a writer, Lu developed an extensive knowledge of traditional Chinese culture, both visual and literary. He was also an avid collector of ancient seals and inscriptions, stone rubbings, and early books with woodcut illustrations.

Active as a short-story writer, poet, essayist, and translator, Lu Xun published numerous books. In 1909 he designed the cover for an early collection of his own short stories, combining a small line drawing that was reminiscent of Art Nouveau illustration with simple characters for the title that were commissioned from a professional calligrapher. The cover provided an early indication of Lu's synthetic interests in European and Chinese culture, although later book covers by him would not reflect this synthesis so blatantly. In fact, his design of 1923 for Peach Colored Cloud, a translation of fairy tales, showed no trace of Western influence. It featured a decorative motif from the ancient Han dynasty, which Lu tastefully combined with his own calligraphy.

For many of the books that Lu wrote, edited, or translated, he invited artists to design covers of their own or to collaborate with him. Among these artists were two leading designers of book and periodical covers in the republican period: Tao Yuanqing (1893-1929) and Chen Zhifo (1896–1929). Tao was a painter who began to collaborate with Lu Xun in 1924, providing a sketchy calligraphic drawing of a nude woman surrounded by flowers for Lu's translated work, Symbols of Depression. Tao, who taught design at the National Academy of Art in Hangzhou, was interested in ancient Chinese patterns and motifs as well as modern Western art. His covers draw on many sources from prehistoric carvings and stone rubbings to traditional Chinese scroll painting and Western watercolor techniques. Some scholars consider his best design to be the cover for Lu Xun's 1926 short story collection, Wandering. It is comprised of flat shapes that depict three abstract seated figures beneath a radiant sun on a reddish brown ground. A black line divides the image from the modest calligraphy of the title.

Chen Zhifo began as a weaver and textile designer. He trained in China and in Japan, where, beginning in 1919, he was the first foreign student to study design at the Tokyo Academy of Arts. In 1923, he settled in Shanghai, where he started a company to train fabric designers, but this enterprise ran into difficulties and instead he became one of Shanghai's leading graphic artists. The Commercial Press hired him to design covers for the Eastern Miscellany, which he did for six years. Another assignment for the Press was a series of covers for the Short Story Magazine. Though Chen's cover designs of the early 193os express his interest in patterns, prior work such as his 1927 cover for an issue of the Short Story Magazine was strongly influenced by Art Nouveau and French fashion illustration just as the designs of numerous other Shanghai graphic artists were. His later covers, particularly those for the journal Modern Student in 1931, contain traces of European illustration, but these are integrated with complicated overlays of decorative motifs. As a working commercial artist, Chen had to create images that suited his clients, hence his stylized depictions of women and his virtuoso execution of ornamental forms. He could also rely more directly on traditional Chinese patterns as he did for several book covers on which he collaborated with Lu Xun in the early 193os. For a collection of Lu's writings published in 1933, Chen created a stark rectilinear formal composition, based on the design of a traditional Chinese temple, which provided a space for Lu to draw his own calligraphic title. For another collaboration with Lu, Chen devised an overall pattern of complex fretwork to which Lu added his own calligraphy. Chen also taught commercial art in Shanghai and Guangzhou and published several books on basic design including a popular textbook, Tuan Goucheng (ABC of Design Method), which first appeared in 1930 and went through multiple editions.

Unlike Tao Yuanqing and Chen Zhifo, Qian Juntao (1906-1998) started his career as a graphic designer. He studied at the Shanghai Arts Normal School, where one of his teachers, the cartoonist Feng Zikai (1898–1975), had a particularly strong influence on him. Feng had been a student of Li Shutong (188o-1942), who studied Western oil painting at the Tokyo School of Fine Arts with Kuroda Seiki. Li then established a comparable course in Hangzhou when he returned to China in 1912. Among his many innovations, Li introduced graphic illustrations to Chinese newspapers, which at the time carried only pictorial advertisements. He was also an early advocate for adding commercial art to the traditional art curriculum.

After his studies, Qian Juntao was hired in 1925 by the Kaiming Book Company, a major Shanghai