press, where Feng Zikai was on the board of directors. There Qian became a prominent member of the design staff. Working for Kaiming and for other clients, he designed covers for journals and books in various styles, depending on what was required for a particular commission. There is little evidence in Qian's work of the traditional Chinese motifs or themes that one finds in the designs of Tao Yuanqing or Chen Zhifo. Qian's designs for book and journal covers of the late 192os and early 193os include stylized images of leaves and other natural forms as well as narrative elements for the covers of novels such as part of a woman's nude body in a Cubist-inspired composition for Another Wife, or a man and a nude woman facing each other for A Great Love. The journals for which Qian designed covers include Student, Modern Woman, Ahead of the Times, and the Short Story Magazine.

Around 193o, Qian turned to Russian Constructivism and especially the book and journal covers of Alexander Rodchenko, El Lissitzky, and Liubov Popova, whose bold geometric lettering was an integral part of their cover compositions. To these precedents he added nothing particularly new except to adapt the expressive Constructivist lettering style to the design of Chinese characters and to apply the geometric compositions of the Russians to the design of Chinese book and journal covers. This was evident in his design for the cover of Literature Monthly, whose first issue appeared in 1935 (Plate 77). Of the major graphic designers in the republican era, Qian worked in the broadest range of styles and had the strongest sense of the modern book or journal cover as a unified composition whose lettering was successfully integrated with other design elements.

Among Chinese graphic designers, Art Deco was by far the most popular foreign style or graphic language. It was widely adopted for colorful book and journal covers, although it was frequently joined with Chinese elements such as traditional pattern fragments or even images. This hybrid mix, known as the Shanghai Style or haipai, was not only evident in graphic design but also in other art forms.

## Typography and lettering

Missionary presses developed the most widely used Chinese typefaces in the 19th century. During the republican period, the type trade came to be dominated by three large Shanghai publishers: the Commercial Press, Zhonghua Books, and World Books. The missionary types, particularly the Song/Meihua fonts that the Englishman William Gamble (1830-1866) developed, were adequate but could not fulfill the demands of some educated Chinese who had an appreciation for calligraphy. Efforts by Chinese typographers working for the Commercial Press and other presses were made to expand the range of available typefaces, with frequently limited success, while the original missionary Song typefaces underwent revisions, often based on Japanese improvements. The Song font dominated in its various Chinese and Japanese reincarnations. Of the fonts trying to imitate early Song printing, Fangsong (1916), created independently but purchased by Zhonghua Books, was the most important (Fig. 35.1o). Successful calligraphic styles had to wait for the later development of other typefaces.

By comparison with the Western countries and even Japan, the number of Chinese fonts was limited, thus accentuating the contrast between the printed texts of books and journals and their far more flamboyant covers that frequently featured handdrawn characters in a modern style. These characters could take diverse forms. Some were highly decorative and mirrored the intricate complexity of traditional Chinese fabric designs or fretwork patterns, while others were created as equivalents of Western san serif letters. Known as Hei ti or "black types," these consisted of either thin or thick lines or a combination of the two. The types also varied between those that retained the forms of traditional kai shu characters, and those whose geometric structures were derived from Constructivist or De Stijl precedents. Although few fonts were actually cast during the republican era, experimental lettering was in great demand, not only for book titles and magazine mastheads but also for