the Lu Xun Academy of Literature and Art had been established. Its fine arts department included courses in propaganda painting, caricature, and print making, and the school spawned a number of mobile woodcut groups that traveled through the countryside documenting the disastrous actions of the Japanese military and eventually depicting the struggle of the peasants to overcome their feudal past. Woodblock prints were made quickly and distributed freely as a primary means of disseminating Communist Party propaganda. Although the school was named after Lu Xun, he never joined the party, holding out instead for a socially conscious art that was grounded in humanism rather than political ideology.

## Siam

## Crafts and the economy

Modernization began in Siam in the 19th century under King Chulalongkorn, who reigned until 191o. Through skillful diplomacy, he was able to protect the country, whose name permanently became Thailand in 1949, from colonization, while also reforming its administrative structure and education system. When his son King Vajiravudh succeeded him, he found that Siam's arts and crafts had been profoundly neglected and he lamented the Western-oriented elite's preference for thermos flasks and cheap cigarette cases rather than locally made bowls and mother-of-pearl boxes.

To reinvigorate the arts and crafts, King Vajiravudh created a Department of Fine Arts in 1912 and the following year he initiated plans for a School of Arts and Crafts, which was dedicated on the one hand to preserving traditional practices but on the other to introducing new techniques from abroad. Continuing his father's efforts to modernize Siam and to further his own promotion of Siamese nationalism, King Vajiravudh encouraged economic self-sufficiency, though he had no good strategy for industrialization. In an essay of 1915 entitled "Wake Up, Siam," he opposed the importation of goods from abroad and called for a return to a time when the country could produce for its own needs. Refusing the Meiji model in Japan, where the Japanese government and military played a strong role in the industrialization process, the king exhorted Siamese businessmen and laborers to take more responsibility and not expect the government to be the leader.

Nonetheless, King Vajiravudh engaged in various activities to improve and promote his country's products. Beginning in 1913, he fostered a series of annual Arts and Crafts Fairs and he used these as bully pulpits to champion the arts and encourage the purchase of work by local artists and craftsmen. By 192o, furniture, baskets, and silver and ivory work were among the examples of domestic artisanry on display at these fairs. The king also promoted Siam's participation in foreign exhibitions, supporting pavilions to display Siamese arts and crafts at the Turin Exhibition of 1911, the Leipzig International Exhibition of 1914, and San Francisco's Panama Pacific International Exhibition of 1915. For Turin and San Francisco, the pavilions were constructed in traditional Siamese style. The country's presence at these exhibitions was significant, given that no other nation in Asia with the exception of Japan had a comparable sense of participation. All of Siam's neighbors were colonies and were represented abroad, if at all, as European possessions.

King Vajiravudh's greatest effort to strengthen the local economy was his plan for a grand Siamese Kingdom Exhibition that was to open in 1925. His intention was to invite countries around the world to present products such as farm machinery that could aid the economy and to also provide a forum where local entrepreneurs could display their own goods to an international audience. Work on the exhibition was well underway in late 1925 when the king died, but the project was terminated as a cost-cutting measure by his successor King Prajadhipok.

Prajadhipok reigned until 1935, although Siam changed from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy following a coup in 1932. The Ministry of Education, which was established after the coup, set up a new School of Fine Arts in 1933. The school reduced the