emphasis on tradition that had existed in the earlier School of Arts and Crafts, focusing instead on more Western-oriented techniques. Such preparation enabled some of the graduates to pursue successful careers as commercial artists.

## Graphic Design

As a kingdom rather than a colony, Siam was responsible for designing all of its own official documents, currency, and postage stamps. The country issued its first stamps in 1883, when the postal service was established. The text was in Siamese but the name Siam in English was added once the country joined the Universal Postal Union two years later and letters were mailed abroad. The stamp designs featured portraits of the king and his successors surrounded by ornate borders.

Much printed matter was produced for the royal household, and this included everything from menus for state dinners to invitation cards, seals, and stationery. Businesses required letterheads, bills and receipts, whose most interesting graphic characteristic was the range of Siamese letterforms they adopted, and commercial graphics also included medicine and cigarette packages and cigarette cards. Much of the cigarette advertising was designed for the local market by the British American Tobacco Company, more than likely in their Shanghai office.

Reflecting his strong nationalist feelings, King Vajiravudh, a prolific author of novels, plays, and essays, put forth several radical schemes to reform the transliteration of Siamese characters into roman letters and to change the Siamese writing system. The latter entailed a return to an earlier system of writing and was intended to make the language easier for foreigners to read. It never caught on, however, and was eventually abandoned. The king also took an interest in book production, and many of his own writings were issued in volumes designed and illustrated by leading Siamese artists including Prince Naris (1863-1947), a half-brother of King Chulalongkorn, who was active as a painter and sculptor, craftsman, architect, and composer as well as an illustrator. At the request of the king, he also drew up an official state coat of arms that enclosed in a circle three figures of Hindu and Buddhist mythology, Garuda, Naga, and Vishnu, which the king preferred to an earlier coat of arms he had devised in a Western heraldic style. However, after a brief period he requested Prince Naris to remove Naga and Vishnu, thus leaving the mythical Garuda bird as Siam's principle icon.

As part of an earlier interest in Western culture, a number of popular Western novels by authors such as H. Rider Haggard and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle were translated into the Siamese language at the beginning of the century. By the 192os, a plethora of books by local authors also appeared. Primarily romantic novels and ghost tales, they were published in soft cover versions with colorful covers that enticed the reader with dramatic portrayals of the characters. Cover artists tended to depict men and women in modern Westernized dress and with Western hairstyles and facial features. The most prominent among the artists was Hem Wetchakon (1903-1969), who did thousands of illustrations for books and magazines. Around 1924, he illustrated a number of textbooks for the Ministry of Defense and by the late 192os he had become a prolific illustrator of fiction covers. After the constitutional monarchy was established in 1932, interest in reading spread and various hardback non-fiction titles as well as more serious fiction books were published. Though some of their covers continued the sensationalist imagery of the popular novels, others reflected a more serious attempt to represent the contents graphically.

In addition, women's magazines proliferated during the reign of King Prajadhipok and after. Like the books of popular fiction, they were also attractive vehicles for commercial artists. A leading illustrator of magazine covers was Saneh Khlaikhlu’an (dates unconfirmed), whose covers for Nat Nari were largely derived from Western examples or Chinese calendar posters. They depicted modern women with bobbed hair, modern clothes, and Westernized physical features.