Both Saneh Khlaikhlu'an and Hem Wetchakon were also active as advertising artists. However, Thai advertising during this period broke no new ground. Largely, ads copied Western precedents, though Thai iconography would occasionally be included. The most distinctive logo from the period is the red lion that identifies Singha Beer, a product of the Boon Rawd Brewery, whose early posters highlighted the bottle in different settings. Chinese calendar posters with texts in both Chinese and Siamese also circulated widely to promote various "China Made" products such as cigarettes, medicine, or cosmetics to Siam's sizeable Chinese population.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

Books and articles rarely address the topic of industrial design in China during the Republican period. Shou Zhi Wang, "Chinese Modern Design: A Retrospective," Design Issues 6, no. I (Fall 1989) does have some material on the interwar years even though it concentrates on the period after World War II. An extensive literature on industrialization in China exists including a number of studies by Albert Feuerwerker; Victor D. Lippit, The Economic Development of China; Dwight H. Perkins, ed., China's Modern Economy in Historical Perspective; and Thomas Rawski, Economic Growth in Prewar China and China's Transition to Industrialism: Producer Goods and Economic Development in the Twentieth Century. Karl Gerth, China Made: Consumer Culture and the Creation of the Nation is the principal source for the National Product Movement.

Art Deco 1910-1939; and Wen-hsin Yeh, "Shanghai Modernity: Commerce and Culture in a Republican City," The China Quarterly, no. 15o (June 1997). Shanghai commerce is discussed in Sherman Cochran, ed., Inventing Nanjing Road: Commercial Culture in Shanghai, 1900–1945.

There are a number of books on modernism in China and especially its manifestations in Shanghai. See Jo-Anne Birnie Danzker, Ken Lum, and Zheng Shengtian, eds., Shanghai Modern, 1919-1945; Edward Denison and Guang Yu Ren, Modernism in China: Architectural Visions and Revolutions; Lynn Pan, Shanghai Style: Art and Design Between the Wars; Anna Jackson's essay, "Art Deco in East Asia," in Charlotte Benton, Tim Benton, and Ghislaine Wood, eds.,

For graphic design, Ellen Laing has written the authoritative book on calendar posters, Selling Happiness: Calendar Posters and Visual Culture in Early-Twentieth-Century Shanghai and an excellent online essay about the journal Shanghai Sketch, "Shanghai Manhua, the Neo-Sensationalist School of Literature, and Scenes of Urban Life." Scott Minick and Jiao Ping, Chinese Graphic Design in the Twentieth Century is a good starting point for graphic design in the Republican era as well as afterwards. Julia Andrews' essay on "Commercial Art and China's Modernization," in the catalog of a Guggenheim Museum exhibition, A Century in Crisis: Modernity and Tradition in the Art of Twentieth-Century China; Carrie Waara's article "The Bare Truth: Nudes, Sex, and the Modernization Project in Shanghai Pictorials," in Jason Kuo's edited volume, Visual Culture in Shanghai, 185os–193os; and Leo Ou-fan Lee, Shanghai Modern: The Flowering of a New Urban Culture in China, 1930–1945 all have useful information on the design of Chinese books and magazines. Kuiyi Shen's essay "Lianhuanhua and Manhua – Picture Books and Comics in Old Shanghai," in John A. Lent's edited volume Illustrating Asia: Comics, Humor Magazines, and Picture Books is an excellent study of Shanghai's satirical journals. On Chinese typography, see Christopher A. Reed, Gutenberg in Shanghai: Chinese Print Capitalism, 1876–1937. Paul French's biography Carl Crow – A Tough Old China Hand: The Life, Times, and Adventures of an American in Shanghai has excellent material about early advertising developments in Shanghai.

Michael Sullivan, Art and Artists of Twentieth-Century China and his Modern Chinese Artists: A Biographical Dictionary both have a good deal of information related to Republican-era graphic design and designers. Material on revolutionary publications