# Chapter 36: Asia: Japan, its Colonies, and its Territories 1900-1937

## Introduction

Japan began its rise as a major economic and military power in Asia during the course of the Meiji era, which lasted from 1868 to the death of the Meiji emperor in 1912. During this period, the country embarked on an ambitious course of industrial development that prompted the rapid growth of heavy industry and resulted in resounding military victories over the Chinese and Russians in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 and the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905. Japan supported the Allies in World War I and as a result it gained control of German concessions in China after the war.

Until the end of World War II and even beyond, Japan was the only Asian country that had a national industrialization policy. With much of the region colonized by the British, French, and Dutch, there was little competition with the exception of China, a country much slower to industrialize due in part to a more diffuse political situation and a weaker economic infrastructure. The Taisho era in Japan, which lasted from 1912 to 1926, was a period of relative political openness and a time when the nation sought to create its own version of modernity. Young men who embraced the modern spirit were called mobo (modern boy) and their girlfriends were known as moga (modern girl). In 1923, Japan was beset by a great tragedy, the Kanto earthquake, which destroyed much of Tokyo, although it led to a reconstruction plan that included a modern network of roads, transport, parks, and new dwellings. Politically, the Japanese government became more open in the Taisho years, although extreme positions were not tolerated. The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 stimulated the formation of a Japanese Communist Party in 1922, but it was dissolved two years later. Several socialist organizations were also banned.

The Taisho era witnessed the emergence of a new middle class in the cities, but the greatest economic power rested with a handful of wealthy businessmen who headed the family-owned zaibatsu or conglomerates that controlled diverse companies in many different fields including banking, shipbuilding, iron making, mining, and chemicals. The initial "Big Four" zaibatsu were Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, and Yasuda, which, like large American or European corporations, sought to build organizations whose varied enterprises were integrated vertically as much as possible. These were followed by a second wave of "New Zaibatsu," created primarily by a breed of ambitious young entrepreneurs, many of whom were educated at engineering colleges. When Japan began to militarize in the 193os, both the old and new zaibatsu collaborated closely with the military. Outside of the zaibatsu most Japanese manufacturers had fewer than 100 employees and many had less than ten.

While the zaibatsu concentrated on heavy industry and military technology, consumer goods for domestic consumption were largely produced by smaller firms—unlike the United States and Europe, for example, where big corporations such as General Electric, Westinghouse, Siemens, and the AEG pioneered the production of electric appliances for a large consumer market. In fact, the Japanese consumer class was considerably smaller than that in the United States or Europe and the Japanese economy consisted as well of a large rural population whose standard of living was far below that of the city dwellers.

The Showa era, which followed the inauguration of Emperor Hirohito at the end of 1926, initially continued the liberal Taisho climate of reform and Westernization, but soon factions espousing ultra nationalism and militarism came to dominate the