country. In 1915, Japan had presented China with its Twenty-One Demands, which called for China's recognition of Japan's special interests in particular parts of the country. In 1931, the Japanese Army created the Manchurian Incident, when it moved aggressively to gain control of Manchuria, a name given to the territory in north-east China. The following year, Japan established the puppet state of Manchukuo, while continuing to exploit Manchuria for its resources and as an additional market for Japanese goods as well as a place to send settlers from its own poor agricultural regions. In 1937, Japan started a full-scale war with China and this conflict continued until the end of World War II, even as the Japanese military widened the conflict by launching the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere in 194o and attacking the United States at Pearl Harbor in December 1941.

## Developing a design policy

As part ofits move to become an industrial nation during the Meiji era, Japan was concerned with the quality of its exports. Its greatest industrial success, however, was not in the creation of mass-produced consumer goods, which it did not believe to be essential for its economic development, but rather in heavy industry and the production of military equipment. Nonetheless, the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce, which was founded in 1881, was interested in improving international trade. Initially, the most successful strategy was making traditional objects for Western consumption. Such objects seemed a breath of fresh air to British designers like E. W. Godwin and Christopher Dresser who found in Japanese export wares a welcome alternative to the stifling ornamentation of European revival styles. Consequently, Japanese pavilions at Chicago's Century of Progress Exhibition in 1893 and the 1900 Exposition Universelle in Paris were designed in a traditional style to perpetuate an Orientalist image of Japan, even as the nation was actively industrializing. Shortly after the turn of the century, the market for traditional Japanese crafts such as lacquer and porcelain began to decline and the Meiji government, which needed a means to obtain foreign currency, had to rethink its export strategy.

In 191 the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, Makino Nobuaki (1861-1949), requested a proposal to improve the marketability of Japanese crafts and promote their export. Submitted by two professors from the Tokyo Higher School of Industrial Art, the proposal contained a series of recommendations: setting up an official crafts bureau in the ministry; establishing craft exhibitions and prizes for outstanding designs that could then be produced for export; and creating a crafts museum that would display crafts from Japan and other parts of the world. At the beginning of the Taisho era in 1913, the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce created an annual exhibition, known by its shortened form Noten, to display new craft designs that might be produced for export. Although the exhibition changed its name several times, it remained in existence until 1939, and the annual displays became a valuable support for craftsmen. It is important to recognize that the discourse of designing consumer products for mass production, which had animated European and American design thinking since the 183os, garnered less attention in Japan than that related to craft production, which for many officials and businessmen, particularly managers of small and medium-sized enterprises, substituted for design. This was due in large part to the government's lack of interest in creating a strong domestic market for mass-produced goods.

By contrast, the question of what to export was as central to Taisho officials as it had been to officials in the Meiji era. In the early part of the century, Meiji administrators emphasized the establishment of heavy industry and the creation of products that would be useful to the military, striving continually to reduce their dependence on foreign experts. Their main aim was to catch up with the West, particularly in areas of high technology. Consequently, far less attention was paid to creating new products, whether technological or aesthetic, that could be successful in Western markets.