Throughout the 192os and 193os, the challenge of improving the quality of export goods remained on the agenda of the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce and one of its successors, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. At the same time, an emerging middle class was exploring the potential of a new lifestyle that might draw from both Western and Japanese cultures, while selected groups of designers and manufacturers, particularly in the sectors of furniture, appliances, household goods, and fashion, were creating new prototypes and products that signified major changes in cultural practices.

## French influences

In the late 19th century, some Japanese artists and craftsmen became interested in Western painting and decorative arts. Among Japanese craftsman, Itaya Hazan (1872-1963) adopted some Art Nouveau themes based on photographs he saw in the British design magazine The Studio, and in 19o2 the critic, editor, and design educator Fukuchi Mataichi (1862-19o9), who had studied art in Paris, organized the first Japanese exhibition of Art Nouveau objects. Art Nouveau ceramics, textiles, and graphics were also prominently displayed at the Fifth National Industrial Exhibition in Osaka in 1903.

In Paris during the 192os, a master lacquer craftsman, Sugawara Seizo, who had emigrated there from Japan around 19o6, taught Eileen Gray and Jean Dunand how to apply lacquer techniques to the production of French moderne furniture and copper urns. Sugawara, however, was working outside the exotic image that the Japanese government continued to convey in the products it sent abroad.

The Japanese Pavilion for the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs, an exhibition replete with design in the new Parisian moderne style, was a traditional wooden dwelling filled with artisanal objects including historic dress and bamboo and lacquer furnishings. Japanese artists living in Paris, who were seeking to become part of the international modernist community, criticized the vernacular character of the pavilion. Tsuda Shinobu (1875–1946), a professor of metalwork at the Tokyo Bijutsu Gakko (Tokyo School of Fine Arts), was in Paris at the time of the exhibition and was invited to serve on the exhibition's international jury. When he returned to Japan, Tsuda promoted the moderne style, which was taken up by some younger craftsmen, who formed a group they called Mukei (Formless) in 1926. Group members were interested in European Deco not simply as a formal style but as evidence of individual creativity, which they opposed to the reproduction of traditional forms. In their manifesto, they espoused “[freshness], vividness, vitality,” while rejecting “nostalgia ... silence, conservatism." Though comprised mainly of metalworkers, the group included other craftsmen as well. A principal member was Takamura Toyochika (1890— 1972), a former student of Tsuda's, who was joined by others including the metalworker Naito Haruji (1895–1979), and the lacquer artists Yamazaki Kakutaro (1899–1984) and Matsuda Gonroku (1896–1986). What characterized the work of the Mukei craftsmen was the combination of modern forms and patterns that originated in the West with techniques of Japanese craftsmanship. A wooden box by Yamazaki from 1934 displays a deep knowledge of lacquer technique, but its design emphasizes stylized leaf motifs and woods of different colors. Yamazaki had actually studied European design in Paris, where he became acquainted with Jean Dunand and other French decorative artists. He was adamant about making the new forms and motifs integral to the objects he produced and in an essay of 1929 he criticized those craftsmen who simply incorporated superficial details derived from European styles. Yamazaki's concern for integral form was evident in Takamura Toyochika's metal vase, which the artist titled "Construction for Flower Arrangement." It joined together geometric forms—cylinders, rectilinear shapes, and a sphere—in a vase form that might just as well refer to Russian Constructivism as to French Deco, while Naito Haruji's cast bronze wall clock of