vocabulary—notably the rectilinear volumes, glass facades, walkways, and pilotis or support columns— and conjoined them with aesthetic elements from traditional Japanese architecture and design, particularly exposed linear construction and the gridded windows that looked like shoji screens.

## Lifestyle Improvement and Western-Style Goods

Beginning in the Meiji era, the adoption of Western customs and material forms of Western culture became an important issue for the Japanese. During the Taisho period, which corresponded to the emergence of a new middle class in Japan's cities, aspects of Western lifestyles were promoted through multiple channels including department stores, mass media periodicals, school textbooks, and social organizations. Women were the principal targets of these efforts based on the government's promotion of the home as the woman's domain.

Among department stores, Tokyo's Mitsukoshi was the oldest, having been founded in 1673 as a retailer of kimonos. lts development into a full-scale department store was strongly influenced by Western models including pioneering stores like the Bon Marché in Paris, which mingled cultural activities with commerce in order to promote their merchandise.

According to Jordan Sand, Mitsukoshi was the first department store to establish a position for an interior decorator when it hired Hayashi Kohei (dates unconfirmed) in 1906. Although Hayashi's first commission for the store was the interior of the Japanese Embassy in Paris, which he designed in a Japanese style, domestically he created Mitsukoshi displays of furniture in traditional Western styles such as Louis XV, Jacobean, and English Cottage. His strategy as a decorator, as Sand notes, was to add ornament to Western furniture in order to diminish what he calls its"Westernness." Hayashi's adoptions of Western styles were expensive and their display in Mitsukoshi's exhibitions functioned primarily, as Sand indicates, to educate a new consumer class, initially the wealthy bourgeoisie and then the broader emerging middle class.

In 191o, Mitsukoshi began to manufacture its own furniture. Though it also sold items for the traditional Japanese household, it promoted Westernstyle pieces—chairs, tables, and beds—as signs of a new lifestyle, as did other department stores like Takashimaya. Mitsukoshi offered these pieces in multiple styles. Around 191o, a Secession style based on Austrian and German examples was particularly popular among young designers, although a furniture competition the department store organized in 1914, where a number of pieces in that style were featured, also indicated that the designers had little practical knowledge of designing for mass production.

One of Mitsukoshi's more popular pieces was an inexpensive rattan chair, which combined a cumbersome Western-style design with an indigenous material. For many consumers, these chairs were the first they ever acquired. Besides chairs, the Mitsukoshi workshop turned out other relatively inexpensive massproduced furniture—lamps, tables, desks, tea shelves, and plant stands. Unlike Hayashi's ornate hybrid pieces, which were aimed at an elite market, these massproduced pieces had simple designs that sometimes embodied decorative elements derived from Secession or Art Nouveau sources. Even though they cost less than the custom-made pieces, their prices were still beyond what many Japanese consumers could afford.

Before World War I, the Tokyo Electric Light Company, which had an affiliation with General Electric in the United States, produced most of the nation's household lamps. When General Electric's patent on the tungsten filament for light bulbs expired in 1927, new Japanese companies entered the field to profit from the extension of electric power to the home. By 1931, the Tokyo Electric Light Company had a number of large self-contained factories that could manufacture everything related to the lamps from the components for the light bulb to the packaging.

Besides this one large company, however, a group of mid-sized firms as well as numerous small factories and workshops also produced house lamps, ranging from fancy styles to cheap exemplars. In general, these lamps did not benefit from a designer's involvement and the majority were made according to the most expedient methods of production.

Concomitant with the cultural reforms embodied in the Western furniture that was intended to replace Japanese customs such as sitting, eating, and sleeping on the floor, was the reform in kitchen design that centered on two features: the introduction of more efficient techniques for food preparation and the substitution of new gas-burning appliances for the traditional shichirin, a small coal-burning equivalent of the hot plate.

As early as 1904, the Tokyo Gas Company began to market a gas-burning rice cooker as well as a single-burner gas stove. A selling point for the new appliances was that they could replace a servant, due to their increased efficiency. The adoption of these smaller appliances was all that most families could afford. Western-style ovens as well as refrigerators were also on the market, but few people bought them because of the price as well as lack of space and their unfamiliarity with those products.

Similar to the household efficiency movement that Christine Frederick spearheaded in the United States around 1915, Japan had its own female efficiency advocates. Prominent among them was Hani Motoko (1873-1957), publisher of the widely-read women's magazine Fujin no tomo (Ladies' Companion). A principal concern for Hani was to make a change from working on the floor in a crouching or sitting position to working standing up. By 1913, the mailorder division of Ladies' Companion was offering a worktable that combined a raised work surface with drawers, compartments, and shelves for storing cooking utensils and food.

In its "Efficiency” issue of 1917, Ladies' Companion published plans for two entire kitchens that were designed for efficient work. The difference between them and those that Christine Frederick espoused is that the Frederick kitchen incorporated a number of electrical appliances, while the Japanese version, with limited appliances such as a clock and gas burner, put more emphasis on body positions and movements. The low number of appliances in Japanese households continued throughout the 192os and 193os. Although Japan became a world leader in household electrification, by 1937 less than I percent of Japan's households had a refrigerator and about o.2 percent had washing machines compared, for example, to more than 5o percent of American households, which had electric refrigerators and washing machines at the beginning of the 1940s.

One appliance that did become popular was the radio. The first ones on the market were crystal sets that Hayakawa Tokuji (1894-198o) produced to correspond with Japan's first radio broadcasts in 1925. Within a year, Hayakawa was marketing his radios, which he sold in nondescript wooden housings, under the name "Sharp Dyne." Soon thereafter, "Sharp' became the brand name for all his products. In 1928, he replaced the crystal sets with vacuum-tube radios, and by 1929, Sharp was Japan's leading radio manufacturer. Hayakawa continued to make improvements in his new models. The Sharp Dyne Type 31 of 1930 had a horn speaker perched on a wooden box, and the Sharp Dyne Fuji Type 33 of 1932, by which time there were more than one million radio listeners in Japan, was perhaps the first of Hayakawa's products to have a more artistic appearance. The housing had angled corners and a shaped frame around the mesh that covered the vacuum tubes. The speaker, which sat on top of the housing, was shaped like a hexagon and had an ornamental wooden decorative form on its façade. Sharp was one of the earliest Japanese companies outside the automobile manufacturers to install a conveyor belt on its production line, thereby reducing the time spent on the assembly of a radio to less than a minute.