Beginning in 1933, Hayakawa began to open new markets for his radios throughout Southeast Asia, thus becoming one of Japan's few medium-sized enterprises to create a successful mass-produced product for export. Although the radio did not figure directly within the various plans and programs for Japan's lifestyle improvement, it was nonetheless an important component of the country's modernization process.

As historian Kashiwagi Hiroshi has emphasized, reform movements originated both in the private sector as well as the government. The Ministry of Education was a leader in the government's effort to encourage rationalization and the adoption of Western practices and products. In 1919, the ministry sponsored the Seikatsu Kaizen-ten (Lifestyle Improvement Exhibition), and the same year it established the Seikatsu Kaizen Domeikai (Alliance for Lifestyle Improvement), which occupied itself with all areas of life from housing and clothing to food and even social interactions. Among its many committees was one to improve housing on which design educator Kogure Joichi served. In 1924, the committee's report, The Reform of Domestic Furniture, considered six themes including sitting on chairs rather than the floor, shunning decoration in domestic structural facilities, and redesigning floor plans to emphasize family needs rather than those of visitors. The report called for furniture that was simple and strong to accord with the general reforms that were recommended. The call for change had a particular urgency, which resulted from the enormous number of homes in Tokyo that the Kanto Earthquake had destroyed the previous year. Although the Alliance for Lifestyle Improvement did not have the power to mandate social change, it strongly advocated a new lifestyle, disseminating its program through its journal and other means.

## Mingei and New Mingei

In contrast to the efforts to promote a Western lifestyle in Japan, mingei theory, as developed by Yanagi Soetsu (1889–1961) and others, celebrated Japan's native craft traditions. The term mingei (folk-craft) was actually a compound of two Chinese characters as well as a contraction of a Japanese phrase that means "popular crafts." Addressed to collectors rather than those who made everyday objects for the market, Yanagi's strict definition of mingei referred to common household objects that were made by anonymous craftsmen. He saw these as examples of getemono or low crafts made for common people. Yanagi's interest in mingei corresponded to a certain degree with William Morris's interest in the lesser arts, which he, like Yanagi, hoped to elevate to a higher status. Both Morris and John Ruskin were a strong influence on Yanagi as they were on others in Japan, but Yanagi combined the ideas and values he absorbed from the British thinkers with a strong interest in Buddhism.

Mingei also had a particular role within the discourse on Japanese modernity. For Yanagi, who first developed his theory through a study of traditional crafts in Korea, it was a way to retain a sense of Japanese identity within a process of modernization that originated in the West and that was strongly encouraged during the Taisho era. Like William Morris, Yanagi accepted the limited use of machines but fiercely resisted the idea of a machine age. He also espoused socialism as the Arts and Crafts writers did, believing, as historian Kim Brandt notes, that it would bring about what he called the “Kingdom of Beauty," in which the masses would adopt a pre-industrial craft aesthetic as Morris had described in his utopian novel, News from Nowhere.

Others who were active in the initial promotion of mingei were the Japanese potters Tomimoto Kenkichi (1886–1963), Hamada Shoji (1894-1978), and Kawai Kanjiro (189o-1966), and the British potter Bernard Leach (1887–1979). Though Morris's writings had been translated into Japanese as early as 1891, Tomimoto published the first biographical article on Morris in 1912 and is credited with introducing him to the Japanese public as a designer rather than a political figure. In 1914, Tomimoto launched his own design office in Tokyo, following the model of William Morris & Co. He offered a range of services including the design of wallpaper, interiors, furniture, pottery, textiles, metalwork, lacquer ware, stage sets, books, and advertising, but unlike Morris & Co., which existed for many years, even after Morris's death, Tomimoto's office remained open for only a few months

The public became more familiar with mingei theory through a series of articles that Yanagi began to publish in 1927 and which were collected in a book, Kogei no michi (The Way of Crafts), the following year. Mingei's physical form was publicized at the same time in the Mingeikan or mingei model house that Yanagi designed for the Imperial Exposition for the Promotion of Domestic Industry, held in Tokyo's Ueno Park in 1928. As Yuko Kikuchi has noted, the pavilion was a hybrid that combined elements of different Japanese buildings from a teahouse and townhouse to a farmhouse, all mixed with a hint of English Tudor half-timbered design. A small group of craftsmen who were inspired by Yanagi's writings created much of the furniture. They formed a guild in Kyoto—the Kamigamo Mingei Kyodan (Kamigamo Mingei Guild)—that was similar to Ashbee's Guild of Handicraft or Ruskin's Guild of St. George. As an introduction to mingei theory, the house and its furnishings represented a compromise with Yanagi's original definition of mingei as consisting of anonymous household objects for common people. On display in the distinctly middle-class parlor were tables and chairs by guild member Kuroda Tatsuaki (1904–1982). The parlor also included a fireplace with surrounding tiles by Hamada Shoji, which, as Kikuchi notes, may well have been inspired by the one in Morris's Red House. The wife's room, by contrast, featured a tatami mat, futon, and a traditional lacquered chest.

Yanagi published an article towards the end of the exposition in which he supported the manufacture of tables, chairs, and other types of Western furniture, although he argued that such pieces had to embody Japanese form rather than serve as copies of Western designs. This argument was actually close to that of various lifestyle reformers and furniture designers like Moriya Nobuo, who would have been less likely to agree with Yanagi's strong interest in Japanese crafts, particularly his espousal of inexpensive common objects by anonymous craftsmen. Concluding his article, Yanagi urged that mingei embody an "Orientalist spirit" which he associated with a larger Asian identity, a position that the Japanese military would appropriate a few years later.

By early 193ı, Yanagi was promoting the idea of new mingei or newly manufactured handicrafts that possessed the qualities of the vernacular objects he admired. Frequently guided by entrepreneurs and activists from the cities, craftsmen in rural workshops produced goods destined for sale in the metropolitan centers. Among the venues where new mingei was sold were urban shops such as Takumi, Misuzawa, and Minatoya in Tokyo and later some of the large department stores.

Kim Brandt has called attention to the class and gender base of new mingei objects. Though Yanagi envisioned mingei in every home, it was in fact the comfortable urban middle class that became its principal consumers. Hand woven neckties, canes, dress shirts of homespun cloth, and banded Panama hats were clearly directed to the well-to-do man about town, while other objects for the home such as wooden stands to display ceramic plates and literary accessories like bookends and ink stands were also meant for masculine pursuits. Objects intended to evoke the interest of women, who were presumed to purchase most items for the home, included napkins, tablecloths, lampshades, hand towels, curtains, and cushions. New mingei was marketed in the upscale lifestyle magazines, which primarily women read, as a signifier of high fashion, both in home decor and also as fabric for kimonos or dresses. By 1937, however, mingei's social role had shifted. Instead of marking a new urban lifestyle for a privileged class, it was called upon to reinforce national unity once the military declared war