on China and then sought to create a unified Asian region or Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere that would be guided and managed according to Japanese interests.

## Heavy Industry and Transportation

If Japanese small and medium-scale industries seemed slower than their Western counterparts to develop modern techniques of mass production, the larger companies in heavy industries such as steel and chemical production absorbed Western techniques quickly during the late Meiji period and by the beginning of the zoth century were able to reduce their dependence on foreign experts considerably. In fields that involved design, notably all areas of transport, engineers learned to manage large-scale projects that involved complex applications of technology. They were trained primarily at the University of Tokyo, but the Japanese government also sent large numbers of students abroad, many following their basic engineering studies in Japan. Although Japan was considerabiy less developed than Western Europe and the United States in numerous technological areas, the country produced a generation of courageous entrepreneurs who inaugurated large projects without trepidation and eventually made them successful.

Japan's rapid progress in developing shipyards, railroad rolling stock, motorized vehicles, and aircraft was due in large part to government patronage, especially that of the army and navy, which financed many projects to create armaments and other materiel. In the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895, the Japanese Navy destroyed the technically larger Chinese fleet in one day, while in the Russo-Japanese conflict of 1904-1905, Japan again demonstrated its superiority in naval technology, particularly through its design of large high-speed ships that were the most heavily armed of any cruisers built up to that time.

Japan's learning process, whether in shipbuilding, railroad rolling stock construction, airplane design, or automobile manufacturing was generally to purchase one or more foreign examples, engage in extensive testing procedures including in some cases reverse engineering, make improvements where feasible, and then arrange for production either with a government or military facility or with a company in the private sector. Foreign experts were often hired in the early years of this process, as was the case of Sir Edward Reed (1830-1906), Britain's most prestigious naval architect, who supervised the construction of Japan's first warship. As Christopher Howe notes, when the Japanese commissioned ships to be built in British shipyards, their specifications were frequently higher than those of the British Navy.

By 19o7, Japan had its own shipyards, notably the Naval Shipyard in Kure and the Nagasaki Shipyard, owned by Mitsubishi, one of Japan's four zaibatsu. The start of World War I greatly increased the production of ships, largely as a response to the needs of Japanese shipping companies, which were cut off from access to Western vessels. By 1914, Japan had become the world's third largest shipbuilder after Great Britain and the United States, and by the time World War II began, the technological level of ship design in Japan had more or less caught up with the West.

As early as 1896, the NYK (Nippon Yusen Kaisha) Line, which had formed in 1885 through a merger of two existing lines and become a state monopoly that operated the majority of Japan's ocean liners, tankers, and merchant ships, opened the first regular passenger ship service from Japan to the west coast of the United States. By 19oi, NYK Lines ranked as the seventh largest shipping company in the world. In the late 192os the company undertook the ambitious project of designing and building two world-class ocean liners: the Asama Maru, which entered service in 1929, and the Tatsuta Maru, launched a year later. Both ships, created at the Mitsubishi Shipyard, embodied the epitome of luxury ocean travel—lavishly decorated public rooms, comfortable cabins, and swimming pools on the decks.

The interior decoration was done in a European style, though not an innovative one. Waring & Gillow, the London furniture maker, designed the first-class dining and reading rooms on the Asama Maru in a traditional British gentry style, while the Japanese textile firm Kawashima Orimono, known for the elaborate hangings it created for exhibitions during the Meiji period, was involved in designing the first-class cabins.

By the 193os, the NYK Line came to rely less on foreign firms for their interior design and more on Japanese architects, whom they invited to create a modern indigenous style. Perhaps following the example of the Normandie in France, the NYK Line employed the architect Nakamura Junpei (1887–1977), an early exponent of the Secessionist style in Japan who subsequently studied at the École des Beaux Arts in Paris, to design modern Art Deco luxury interiors for another of its passenger ships, the Nishiki Maru, which was launched in 1934. Nakamura combined traditional and modern materials including Japanese lacquer and mother-of-pearl with metal, glass, and resin. Similar to Matsuda Gonroku's designs for Namiki pens, his mingling of Japanese and Western materials and craft techniques produced a hybrid style that could be characterized as one example of Japanese modernity.

Like the shipping industry, the railroads were also controlled by a state monopoly. In 19o6 the Railway Nationalization Act brought most of Japan's private railroads under the supervision of a new national body, the Railway Agency, which became the Japanese Government Railways. Limited railway service began in Japan with imported equipment in 1872, and by 1893 the first steam locomotive of Japanese manufacture, though completely British in appearance, was designed and produced at the government's Kobe works. Construction was supervised by Richard Francis Trevithick (1850-1931), who came to Japan from Britain in 1888 to manage rolling stock production. Trevithick—the grandson of Richard Trevithick, the British mechanic who built the world's first steam locomotive—trained many Japanese engineers who went on to become leaders in locomotive design.

Japanese firms also built railway coaches and strove to keep up with the innovations of the Pullman Company in the United States and other foreign coach manufacturers. Japanese coaches incorporated interior electric lighting in 1898, while Sanyo Railways introduced the first dining cars the same year and inaugurated the first sleeping cars two years later.

By the early 192os, Japanese steam locomotives had developed a distinctive character, although their design was still more heavily determined by technological factors than styling. One of the most widely employed engines was the C51 "Pacific," of which more than 300 were built between 1919 and 1928. Designed to pull express passenger trains, the Csı had an elongated boiler topped by a well-shaped iron chimney, which was sheathed on either side by large panels. A number of improvements were made on this engine and subsequent models in the Cso series were produced until the mid-1930s.

Although they chose streamlining for the modern Asia Express train that operated in Manchuria, railroad executives in Japan were far more cautious about adopting streamlining at home. In 1935, locomotive designers sheathed a C53 "Pacific" engine in a metal housing, but the design was not particularly inspiring and the reduced fuel costs from the lower air resistance were not sufficient to offset the higher maintenance expenses. The following year a second attempt was made with an engine of the C55 class, but despite an improved design, the results were no better and the decision was made not to streamline any other engines. Regardless of the attitude toward streamlining, however, Japan built an extremely efficient rail system throughout the 192os and 193os. Both passenger and freight engines were continually improved and the engineering staff kept abreast of the latest technology and designs in the railway industry.

There was, however, initially less support in Japan for producing automobiles. Unlike the shipping industry and the railroad, both of which were effectively nationalized, no such process occurred with automobile manufacturing, and strong government support for the automobile industry did not emerge until after World War II.

The Locomobile Company of America first introduced automobiles to Japan in 19o1 when it opened a sales showroom in Tokyo. In 1907, Uchiyama Komanosuke (dates unconfirmed), who originally worked as a bicycle technician and had designed his first automobile in 19o2 with a motor imported from the United States, created the Takuri, generally considered to be Japan's first gasoline-powered automobile. Its bodywork, including comfortable leather seats, followed the model of various European luxury cars. While Uchiyama managed to approximate the formal design of the European models, the Tokyo Automobile Works, which intended to manufacture the Takuri, was only able to produce about ten of them.

The inability to manufacture automobiles in quantity plagued other entrepreneurs who were interested in producing cars but who had little or no knowledge of them. In 1913–1914, Hashimoto Masujiro (1875-1944), who had gained experience working with engineering firms in the United States, designed a car with a two-cylinder engine and called it the DAT, a name he derived from the initials of his three major investors. By 1916, Hashimoto had upgraded the DAT's engine to four cylinders but had been unable to produce more than a few cars. In 1918, he and others in the budding automobile industry received a boost from the government's Military Motor Vehicle Subsidy Law, whose intention was to subsidize the production of buses and trucks for the army. It was through this program that several companies such as Hashimoto's learned to mass-produce military vehicles, a skill that they were later able to transfer to the manufacture of automobiles for the general market.

An important figure in the development of the Japanese automobile industry was William R. Gorham (1888-1949), an American mechanical engineer who went to Japan in 1918 to promote an aircraft engine he had designed. Failing to find support for it, he devised a three-wheel two-passenger vehicle that was powered by a Harley Davidson engine. This led to his joining a company headed by Kubota Gonshiro (1871-d.o.d. unconfirmed) that merged with Hashimoto's firm. The new company produced his subsequent design of a small car called the Datson, or son of DAT, to indicate its smaller size in relation to its larger counterpart. The Datson was introduced to the Japanese market in 1931, although its impact was relatively minor at the time.

Throughout the 192os, Japanese auto manufacturers had a difficult time competing with the two large American companies, Ford and GM, which had established their own subsidiaries, Japan Ford and Japan GM, in 1925. While these companies were strong competition for the local manufacturers, they also brought important innovations to Japan that were later to be of great benefit to the Japanese auto industry. First were the conveyor belt and the mass production assembly line that Ford introduced to Japan for the first time. Second, the presence of these companies induced the Japanese government to promote an industry of parts suppliers. Japan Ford and Japan GM helped immensely to raise the quality of those products, which included batteries, wheels, glass, tires, and various other rubber goods. They also established quality control, which the Japanese would excel at in the post-World War II years, and they established chains of dealerships that were required to maintain repair and service shops and to stock replacement parts. As well, the two American companies introduced monthly payment plans. In effect, the American firms brought to Japan an entire system of production, financing, and maintenance without which it would have been impossible to develop a domestic automobile industry. Until the early 193os, the American firms were producing roughly between 2,000 and 5,000 cars annually while the Japanese companies turned out fewer than soo per year. These figures reversed after the reorganization of the Japanese auto industry in the early 193os.

In 1931 the Survey Committee for the Establishment of the Automobile Industry, which

the Ministry of Commerce and Industry set up, recommended that the smaller firms consolidate and concentrate on the mass production of trucks and mid-sized cars so as not to compete with the larger vehicles that the American companies manufactured. As a result, three major companies—Isuzu, Nissan, and Toyota—emerged as the leaders in the field. Isuzu was primarily a producer of trucks, while Nissan was formed in 1933 as a result of further consolidation between the manufacturer of the Datson and another company. The Datson's name was changed to Datsun in 1932 because the former name had a negative connotation in Japanese. Gorham remained a consultant to Nissan whose objective was to compete with Japan Ford and Japan GM in the mass production of passenger cars. He brought in several more engineers from the United States and helped Nissan institute a manufacturing process that was more like an American assembly line than that of any other Japanese automobile company.

The 1932 Datsun, an improved version of its 193ı predecessor, was a small car with an enclosed cab, shaped fenders, and a running board. It resembled the Austin 7, which might have been an unofficial impetus to its design. In 1936, Nissan concluded an agreement with the American company Graham-Paige to introduce a Japanese version of its economy car, the Crusader. This vehicle, larger than the Datsun, was produced in Japan as the Nissan 7o. It differed considerably from the Datsun in its design, due to its rounded corners, curved grill, fuller fenders, and more sculptural form. It was only produced for one year, however, since Nissan stopped making passenger cars in 1938 in order to support the war effort with the production of military vehicles.

The Toyota company resulted from the efforts of Kiichiro Toyoda (1894-1952), who had a passion for automobiles and established an automobile section in 1933 in his father's successful textile machine firm, Toyoda Automatic Loom. His first prototype was the Toyota A-1, which was modeled closely on the Chrysler

Airflow, Only three were built, but the car served as a model for the Toyota AA, the company's first automobile produced for the mass market in 1936. It came in two versions—sedan and phaeton--and about 1,40o were built before it ceased production in 1943. The automobile division was separated from the larger firm in 1937 and christened Toyota Motor Co., a title thought to have a stronger market appeal than the family name.

Japanese automobile companies survived the competition from the more experienced American firms because of two factors. One was the enthusiasm and willingness to take risks that characterized Japan's pioneering auto entrepreneurs like Hashimoto Masujiro and Kubota Gonshiro, the merger of whose companies led to the formation of Nissan; Aikawa Yoshisuke, who spearheaded Nissan in its early years; and Toyoda Kiichiro, the founder of Toyota. Second was the protection afforded these companies by the Japanese government, which not only awarded them contracts to produce military vehicles but also passed the Automobile Manufacturing Enterprise Law in 1936, which mandated that automobile companies turning out more than 3,ooo cars a year had to have majority Japanese ownership. As a result, both Japan Ford and Japan GM closed down their operations and left the country in 1939. Due to the war and the post-war turmoil, however, the Japanese auto industry did not develop sufficiently to compete successfully in international markets until the early 196os.

Besides the role it played in supporting fledgling Japanese automobile manufacturers through large orders for trucks and other vehicles, the military was crucial to the development of aviation in Japan. The first attempt to design an airplane was by a civilian, Ninomiya Chuhachi (1866–1936), who devised plans and a model for a flying machine with a propeller and landing gear in 1893. Unable to interest the army in his idea when he left the military after the Sino-Japanese War, he set up a factory to build a full-scale motorized aircraft with three engines. However, the Wright

Brothers designed their own plane before he was able to finish his and he subsequently retired from the field.

The army took a greater interest in aircraft after the historic flight of the Wright Brothers' Kitty Hawk, and established a study group to conduct research. The first plane made in Japan had an engine that was reverse engineered from a French model and an imported Farman frame, also from France. During World War I, the military used aircraft for the first time when it fought against the Germans in China, a factor that spurred its interest after the war in developing an aviation industry. In 1918, the University of Tokyo established an Aviation Laboratory, which began to supply a steady stream of aviation engineers. At first they worked under foreign experts who had been hired by the various companies, but later they became chief engineers who were given the responsibility to develop new aircraft or engines of their own.

Between 1917 and 1925, a number of private companies began to produce aircraft. As Christopher Howe notes, these companies were of two types. One was the established shipyards with their broad engineering skills, extensive experience, and profits accumulated from World War I. They were exemplified by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, a company that belonged to the Mitsubishi zaibatsu.

The other type was a group of new companies founded by ambitious aeronautical engineers or else firms whose initial purpose had been to work with different technologies. These included the Nakajima Hikoki (Nakajima Aviation Company) and the Aichi Kokuki (Aichi Aircraft Company). Initially Aichi manufactured clocks and gramophones, but was persuaded by the navy to begin producing seaplanes. To help these companies, the army and navy brought in foreign advisors, imported examples of the important monoplanes, biplanes, and seaplanes, and also purchased licenses for the local manufacture of the most widely accepted foreign airplane engines. The military's impetus to become independent of foreign experts and technology increased after it invaded Manchuria in 1931 and established Manchukuo as a puppet government in 1932. That year, the navy inaugurated the Yokosuka Naval Air Technical Arsenal to conduct research and also design new planes. The increased emphasis on research not only led to technological independence but also to significant design innovations in areas such as instrumentation, glass cockpits, autopilot systems, split wing-flap devices, and radio communications systems. With designs like Mitsubishi's A5M Claude fighter of 1935 and the same company's G3M Nel long-range bomber, which entered production in 1936, many within the Japanese aircraft industry felt that they had not only held their own against world standards in aircraft design but had, in fact, surpassed them. In August 1937, a force of G3Ms based in Taipei flew more than I,2oo miles to bomb targets in China, thus carrying out what some believe was the first transoceanic air attack in history.

Given that the army and navy promoted most of Japan's aircraft development, the greatest design advances were made for military rather than civilian purposes. The first commercial air service, the Japanese Air Transport Institute, in fact, used a fleet of sea planes that it purchased from the navy. Other small airlines followed, and in 1928 several of these were consolidated into a new company, the Japan Air Transport Corporation which the government intended to become Japan's national airline in accord with its ambitious plans for expansion in Asia. The airline used a variety of planes, first from the Japanese military and then from foreign manufacturers such as Fokker, whose planes were also manufactured under license by the Nakajima Aviation Company.

In late 1934, Japan Air Transport began to import Douglas DC2s from the United States for commercial air travel, and Nakashima set about manufacturing them under license to the Douglas Aircraft Company. In 1936, the Japanese company put into service Nakashima's design for a smaller twin-engine version of the DC2. Known as the AT-2, it was initially intended for civilian aviation, but in response to a growing