demand for transport after the military declared war on China in 1937, the army adapted the AT-2 for military use by fitting it with more powerful engines. Around 30 were produced for civilian purposes, not only for Japan's national airline but also for the quasi-governmental Manchurian Air Transport Company that had been established in Manchuria in 1932. By comparison, more than 3oo of the AT-2s were built for military use.

By the time Japan declared war on China in 1937, the country had intensified its imperial expansion throughout Asia. Japan Air Transport had its own airline with routes to Manchukuo as well as Japan's older colonies, and when the airline was reconstituted in 1938 as Dai Nippon Koku (International Air Transportation Company), it had no trouble increasing its routes throughout Asia as part of Japan's Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.

## Graphic Design

From the beginning of the 2oth century, graphic design in Japan was strongly influenced by the many new art and design movements in Europe, but these were adapted to an existing Japanese visual culture that was already highly developed by the 19th century. Relief printing flourished during the Tokugawa period (16o3-1868), and in the 18th century, colored woodblock prints, known as ukiyo-e, were derived from multiple impressions. By the late 19th century, various techniques were used for printing book illustrations, advertisements, and packaging. The latter ranged from matchbook covers and labels for beer, wine, and soy sauce to cigarette and cosmetic boxes. Photographic printing for newspapers from metal relief plates began around 1888, the time when color lithography using imported American machines was introduced to print tobacco labels. The first chromolithographic poster, which advertised Kirin beer, was printed in 1903.

In 19o5 the illustrated humor magazine Tokyo Puck began publication. Named after its American predecessor and featuring political cartoons as well as comic strips, it became a vehicle for a number of Japanese illustrators.

It was also one of the first mass-circulation publications to take advantage of Japan's advances in color printing. Besides the Japanese edition, the magazine also circulated widely in English and Chinese.

Tokyo Puck was founded by Kitazawa Rakuten (1876–1955), one of Japan's earliest professional cartoonists, also considered by many to be a founding father of Japanese manga, or comics. Kitazawa was trained as a painter but learned editorial cartooning from the Australian artist Frank Nankivell (1869 1959), who came to Japan around 1891 and began to draw cartoons for the English-language magazine Box of Curios. Nankivell was instrumental in Kitagawa's joining the Box of Curios staff as its first Japanese employee. In 19o2, Kitazawa, inspired by The Yellow Kid and other American comic strips, created Japan's first serialized strip, Mokube Sightseeing in Tokyo.

Within a decade of Tokyo Puck's appearance, other important printing milestones occurred. In 1914 offset lithography—invented in the United States in 19o6—was introduced to Japan, the same year as rotogravure printing. Offset lithography, used for printing artwork, employs the same principle as printing from lithographic stones except that the images are photographically transferred to metal printing plates. Rotogravure, by contrast, is an intaglio process whereby an image is engraved onto a metal cylinder. These new techniques, adopted in Japan within a few years of their introduction in United States and Europe, greatly improved the quality of color reproductions in Japanese mass-circulation publications.

## Typography and lettering

There were also innovations in typographic design, which were adopted for the three Japanese writing systems—kanji, hiragana, and katakana (see Chapter 5). The conventional way of representing them in print is known as mincho, a style that originated in the calligraphy of the Chinese Ming dynasty in the 14th century. As with roman faces, many variants of mincho have been created including bold, italic, extended,