markets was the rubber shoe that was styled after traditional Korean footwear. Its designer was Yi Pyong-du, who became the plant supervisor of the Chongchang Rubber Goods Company. Another firm that produced rubber goods was the Mokpo Rubber Company. Other industries in which Korean entrepreneurs were involved included metals, dyeing, papermaking, ceramics, sake, and soy sauce.

In Kyongsong (the Japanese name for Korea's capital city that became Seoul after 1945), the Hwasin Department Store acquired a privileged place among Koreans because it was the only one in the city during the 192os and 193os that was owned by a Korean, Pak Hung-sik. With its appealing display of commercial products, the Hwasin Department Store must have played a similar role in Seoul as the department stores on Nanjing Road played in Shanghai during the same period, both signifying the aim to adopt modern methods of merchandising that originated in the West.

As a form of soft resistance to the influx of Japanese goods, a Korean consumer cooperative movement started in the 192os in association with the Buy Korean Products Campaign of that period. The campaign's leader was Lee Chan-gap (1904–1974), who was also involved in community development in Hongsong in the south, where he established a school, a consumer co-op, and a credit union.

## Hangul and publishing

The Hangul script in which the Korean language is written was created in the 1sth century (see Chapter 7). As a result of Korean nationalism and a push by Western missionaries, it was first adopted in Korea for official documents in 1894 and introduced in elementary school texts the following year. Nonetheless the literary elites maintained their long tradition of writing with Chinese or Hanja characters, while a majority of Koreans in the late 19th century were illiterate. Japanese became Korea's official language in 191o when the occupation began, but Hangul continued to be taught in schools that Koreans established, though it was written in a mixed script of Hanja and Hangul characters. The Japanese tolerated Hangul until 1938, when the Korean language was banned from the schools. Koreans were forced to speak and write Japanese and were strongly encouraged to adopt Japanese names as an act of assimilation. Korean publications were forbidden in 1941.

Given the disparate policies that governed the use of Hangul in Korea, it is not possible to trace a simple lineage of publications such as newspapers, magazines, and books. Alan Altman writes that the Japanese published the first modern newspaper in Korea, the Choson Shinbo (Choson News) in 1881. It contained separate articles in Chinese and Japanese. In the Chinese section, the Japanese emphasized their economic and political aspirations for Korea, while the articles in Japanese were more closely tied to the daily lives of Japanese traders, although a number of items expressed stereotypes of Koreans and generalizations about them.

The country's first Korean language newspaper was the thrice-monthly Hansong sunbo (Hansong News), launched in 1883 by the government's Office of Culture and Information through the efforts of the Progressive Party. It was printed in the Hanja script and featured a layout with a mix of characters in different sizes to create a visual hierarchy. The paper was printed at the government printing office with equipment brought from Japan and operated by a Japanese technician. A government publication, it covered news within Korea and from abroad, introducing new ideas that came from the West. The Hansong sunbo only lasted for a year and was shut down following a failed coup by one of its founders. It reemerged in 1886 as the Hansong chubo (Hansong Weekly), a paper that was printed with a mixture of Hangul and Hanja types. The content featured editorials, news, and commentary as well as advertisements. A newspaper established in 1896, Tongnip Sinmun (Independent Gazette), was printed in both Hangul and English and featured impartial news stories while at the same time serving as a strong advocate for citizens' rights. A related paper, Hwangsong