purpose to increase Soviet influence on the communist movement within Germany. In 1921, Lenin requested Münzenberg to organize an international support effort to aid victims of the famine that had spread across Russia. Münzenberg subsequently founded the Internationale Arbeiterhilfe (International Worker Relief), which rallied supporters from across the German left. This organization attracted large numbers of participants and built a cadre of supporters for Münzenberg's other propaganda efforts, which included a publishing house, a film company, and various magazines and journals. Münzenberg's publishing venture was the Neue Deutsche Verlag (New German Press), whose projects ranged from a leftist book club to the illustrated weekly Arbeiter Illustrierte Zeitung (AIZ), which began publication in 1924 and was intended for a workingclass audience just as the Berliner llustrirte Zeitung and the Münchner Illustrierte Presse served the middle class. The precursor of AIZ was Sowjetrussland im Bild (Soviet Russia in Pictures), a left-wing pictorial magazine that Münzenberg had founded three years earlier. For AIZ, Münzenberg copied the fornat of the bourgeois illustrated weeklies but filled his magazine with propaganda articles that were critical of capitalist society. To provide photographs, he organized classes to train working-class photographers and then created a Union of Working Class Photographers with its own journal, Der Arbeiterfotograpf (The Worker Photographer).

Münzenberg's strategy as a propagandist was to establish a broad leftist front while at the same time supporting the policies of the Soviet Comintern and the German Communist Party. Heartfield, though he was art director of the Malik-Verlag, worked more directly with the communists. In 1923 he became the editor and designer of the KPD satirical magazine Der Knüppel (The Cudgel) and the party's newspaper, Die Rote Fahne (The Red Flag). He also designed photographic covers for a related magazine, Das Neue Russland (The New Russia). For these publications, Heartfield's designs were more constrained than his iconoclastic Dada layouts and photomontages. This was most likely due to a more conservative KPD policy on visual propaganda. However, Heartfield's ability to juxtapose images against a related text was evident in a cover for Die Rote Fahne related to the 1928 election. It displayed a grasping hand with an adjoining text that stated, "The hand has five fingers. Beat the enemy with five. Vote List 5," the list of KPD candidates. The image then reached a wider audience as a political poster for the election itself.

In 193o, Heartfield started to work regularly for the AIZ, which at one point had a circulation of 450,ooo. He created photomontages with related texts that were used both as covers and as separate back-page features. By 1932, he was ridiculing Hitler and the Nazi Party with a regular series of pungent photomontages that made fun of the Nazi leader while also strongly criticizing the Nazi Party and its actions. In a photomontage entitled Adolf the Superman. Swallows gold and spouts tin, Heartfield depicted Hitler with a weak spine consisting of gold coins (Fig. 21.27). His text inverted the idea of the medieval alchemists who claimed the ability to turn cheap metals such as tin into gold, suggesting that Hitler accepted donations from rich benefactors and turned them into a program of little value. Once Hitler came to power, the AIZ moved to Prague and Heartfield continued to attack the Nazis with more topical photomontages. The magazines were smuggled into Germany where they contributed to an underground resistance to Hitler. However, the AIZ had ceased publication by 1939, the year the Nazis invaded Czechoslovakia.

## Bibliography Bibliographic essay

John Willett, Art and Politics in the Weimar Period: The New Sobriety, 1917-1933 is an overview of Weimar culture that draws together many of its facets including art, architecture, design, literature, theater, and music, Tilmann Buddensieg's edited volume Berlin 1900-1933: Architecture and Design has a more limited focus. Gert Selle discusses product design specifically in Design — Geschichte in Deutschland: Produktkultur als Entwurf und Erfahrung. Twentieth-Century Furniture Design by Klaus Jürgen Sembach, Gabriele Leuthäuser, and Peter Gössel is a good reference for German furniture design during this period. Matilda McQuaid's exhibition catalog Lilly Reich: Designer and Architect adds to the limited literature on German women as designers during the Weimar years. Heinz Hirdina, Neues Bauen, Neues Gestalten: Das Neue Frankfurt/Die Neue Stadt. Eine Zeitschrift zwischen 1926 und 1933 and Karin Kirsch, The Weissenhofsiedlung: Experimental Housing Built for the Deutscher Werkbund both look at the design of furniture and goods for domestic use within the context of the ambitious Weimar building program. The German interest in scientific management and efficiency is discussed in Judith A. Merkle, Management and Ideology: The Legacy of the International Scientific Management Movement. Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts devotes considerable attention to the later activities of the organization in the Weimar period.

The Bauhaus literature is vast and I only used a few general surveys. Hans Wingler, Bauhaus: Weimar, Dessau, Berlin, Chicago is encyclopedic in its inclusion of photographs and documents, while Frank Whitford, Bauhaus is a good short summary although its emphasis on the Weimar period as opposed to Dessau is somewhat out of balance. Bauhaus and Bauhaus People, edited by Eckhard Neumann, has first-hand accounts by Bauhaus professors and others related to one or another incarnation of the Bauhaus. See also, Winfried Nerdinger, Bauhaus-Moderne im Nationalsozialismus: Zwischen Anbiederung und Verfolgung. Much more research is needed on other design schools in the Weimar Republic. Two excellent studies are Wilhelm Nauhaus, Die Burg Giebichenstein: Geschichte einer Deutschen Kunstschule, 1915–1933 and Albert Reimann, Die Reimann-Schule in Berlin.

For the study of graphic design in the Weimar Republic, the pioneering book on this topic is Eckhard Neumann, Functional Graphic Design in the 20's. Jeremy

Aynsley, Graphic Design in Germany, 1890–1945 provides a broad overview, while Leslie Cabarga, Progressive German Graphics 1900-1937 and Steven Heller and Louise Fili, German Modern: Graphic Design from Wilhelm to Weimar are most valuable as visual compilations of German advertising graphics. Both H. K. Frenzel, Ludwig Hohlwein and the volume edited by Christian Schneegass, Ludwig Hohlwein: Plakate der Jahre 1906–1940 document primarily the many advertising posters that Hohlwein did for his commercial clients. Jaroslav Andel, Avant-Garde Page Design, 1900–1950 and Steven Heller, Merz to Emigre and Beyond: Avant-Garde Magazine Design of the Twentieth Century are both excellent references for avant-garde design in Weimar. On Berlin Dada and design, see Stephen Foster and Rudolf Kuenzli, eds., Dada Spectrum: The Dialectics of Revolt and Sherwin Simmons' excellent article, "Advertising Seizes Control of Life: Berlin Dada and the Power of Advertising," Oxford Art Journal 22, no. I (1999). Simmons has also written about the contentiousness of Weimar political graphics in two important articles, "Grimaces on the Walls: Anti-Bolshevist Posters and the Debate about Kitsch,’ Design Issues 14, no. 2 (Summer 1998) and “Hand to the Friend, Fist to the Foe': The Struggle of Signs in the Weimar Republic," Journal of Design History 13, no. 4 (2ooo). I discuss German Constructivism, especially the involvement of Moholy-Nagy and Lissitzky, and its contribution to avant-garde design in The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy, 1917–1946. Werner Schmalenbach makes some mention of Kurt Schwitters'graphic design within the larger context of his art activity but one volume of the exhaustive fourvolume exhibition catalog, "Typographie kann unter Umständen Kunst sein," edited by Volker Rattmeyer, Dietrich Helms, and Konrad Matschke, is dedicated solely to Schwitters graphic design, while two others focus on the ring neue werbegestalter of which Schwitters was a central figure.

Sebastian Carter includes chapters on typographers Rudolf Koch, Georg Trump, and Jan Tschichold