Sinmun (Capitol Gazette), appeared in 1898. Published with a mix of Hanja and Hangul types, it sought to appeal to the middle and upper classes, who were proficient in Chinese. The Gazette was in the forefront of resistance to the Japanese and protested strongly against Japan's aggression. Another paper that appeared the same year as the Gazette was the Cheguk Sinmun (Imperial Gazette), which appealed to the middle and lower classes, though with a less political agenda.

To combat the Japanese censorship that occurred even though Japan had not yet officially colonized Korea, an English journalist, Ernest T. Bethell, joined with a Korean colleague to publish the bilingual Korea Daily News in 1905. Originally published with mixed Hanja and Hangul characters, it later appeared exclusively in Hangul to reach a broader audience, while an English language edition for foreign readers was published as well. Several other papers that followed the Korea Daily News also helped to raise the political awareness of the Korean population.

After Korea's annexation in 1910, the Korea Daily News was one of the few surviving newspapers, though it was converted into a mouthpiece for the Japanese Governor-General under the abridged name Daily News. Thus for a period, the Korean people did not have a press that spoke to their concerns and issues. After the March First Movement, several papers were launched to express the voice of the Korean populace. These included Choson Ilbo (Choson Daily) and Tong-ah Ilbo (Tong-ah Daily), which was funded by the Korean owner of the Kyongsong Textile Company, Kim Song-su. A number of magazines were also published in the period following the March First Movement. Sin yoja (New Woman) and Sin yosong (New Woman) were both women's magazines, the first adopting a feminist position and the second also addressing womens' issues but from a wider perspective. Literary magazines were numerous and became the vehicles for the emergence of a modern Korean literature. A starting point was Changjo (Creation), which was founded in 1919. It was followed by a spate of others——Pyeho (The Ruins)

in 1920, Changmichon (Rose Village) in 1921, Paekcho (White Tide) in 1922, and Kumsong (Gold Star) the following year. Paekcho was known for literature in the romantic tradition and sometimes featured drawings that derived from the themes and styles of late 19th-century European romantic illustrators.

Modern book publishing was strongly influenced by Christian missionaries. In 1885, a missionary Bible with both Korean and English type was published and three years later a French priest transferred a Bible printing office from Japan to Korea, introducing some new printing technology by working with three kinds of Hangul letters. The first complete Korean edition of the Bible was printed in 191o. With the exception of the Bible, the design of Korean books was originally highly derivative of Chinese volumes. Sometimes Chinese and Korean books were so similar in format, language, and writing style that it was difficult to tell them apart. A number of modern Korean novels appeared in the first decades after the March First Movement, but by 1940 the Japanese had ordered the literary magazines to cease publication and forbade the publication of books in the Korean language.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

An excellent introduction to Japanese history during the 1900–1939 period is Peter Duus, ed., The Cambridge History of Japan, Volume 6. The Twentieth Century, while a more focused volume is Louise Young, Japan's Total Empire: Manchuria and the Culture of Wartime Imperialism. An excellent concise introduction to the period is Mikiso Hane, Japan: A Short History. Most of the research on Japanese industrial design has concentrated on the post-war period and little has been written on the period from 19oo to World War II. Principal sources are Kazuko Sato's, essay "Japan: From Anonymous Craftsmanship to the Western Model," in History of Industrial Design, Vol. 3. 1919-1990: The Domain of Design and Hiroshi Kashiwagi, "On Rationalization and the National Lifestyle: Japanese

Design in the 192os and 1930s," in Elise Tipton and John Clark, eds., Being Modern in Japan: Culture and Society from the 1g1os to the 193os. Limited material on this period of Japanese industrial design can also be found in Penny Sparke's Modern Japanese Design, while Sarah Teasley has looked at one designer of furniture in her article "Furnishing the Modern Metropolitan: Moriya Nobuo's Designs for Domestic Interiors 1922-1927, Design Issues 19, no. 4 (Autumn 2003). Iwao Yamawaki provided a brief account of the time he spent at the Dessau Bauhaus in "Reminiscences of Dessau," Design Issues 2, no. 2 (Fall 1985). Haruhiko Fujita adds further material on Japanese furniture design in his unpublished paper "Meaning of Dual Life: Japanese Furniture and Interior Design in the Ages of Westernization and Internationalization," which was presented at the 3rd International Conference on Design History and Design Studies, Istanbul, July 2002.

By contrast with the limited material on Japanese industrial design, there is a considerable body of literature on Japanese industrialization. Books on this topic include Johannes Hirschmeier and Tsunehiko Yui, The Development of Japanese Business, 1600-1973; Christopher Howe, The Origins of Japanese Trade Supremacy: Development and Technology in Asia from 1540 to the Pacific War, Michio Morishima, Why Has Japan 'succeeded'? Western Technology and the Japanese Ethos; Tessa Morris-Suzuki, The Technological Transformation of Japan: From the Seventeenth to the Twenty-first Century; Harold G. Moulton, with the collaboration of Junichi Ko, Japan: An Economic and Financial Appraisal; Hiroyuki Odagiri and Akira Goto, Technology and Industrial Development in Japan: Building Capabilities by Learning, Innovation, and Public Policy; and E. B. Schumpeter, ed., The Industrialization of Japan and Manchukuo, 1930-1940. Japanese Economic History 1930-1960. Books and articles that focus on the design of automobiles or railroad rolling stock are Michael Cusumano, The Japanese Automobile Industry Phyllis A. Genther, A History of Japan's Government-Business Relationship: The Passenger Car Industry;

Marco Ruiz, Japanese Car; Hirofumi Yamamoto, ed., Technological Innovation and the Development of Transportation in Japan; O. S. Nock, Railways of Asia and the Far East; and R. E. G. Davies, Airlines of Asia since 1920. A number of books and articles discuss design within Japanese culture and embed its discussions in issues of modernism. General books on the subject include Ian Buruma, Inventing Japan 1853–1964; Reed Darmon, Made in Japan; Amar Lahiri, Japanese Modernism; Jackie Menzies, ed., Modern Boy, Modern Girl: Modernity in Japanese Art, 1910–1935, the catalog of an exhibition at the Art Gallery of New South Wales; Jordan Sand, House and Home in Modern Japan: Architecture, Domestic Space, and Bourgeois Culture, 1880-1980 and his chapter "The Cultured Life as Contested Space: Dwelling and Discourse in the 192os," in Elise Tipton and John Clark, eds., Being Modern in Japan: Culture and Society from the 191os to the 193os; Miriam Silverberg, Erotic Grotesque Nonsense: The Mass Culture of Japanese Modern Times; Taishō Chic: Japanese Modernity, Nostalgia, and Deco; Peter McNeil, "Myths of Modernism: Japanese Architecture, Interior Design and the West, c. 1920–1940," Journal of Design History 5, no. 4 (1992); and Julia Sapin, "Merchandising Art and Identity in Meiji Japan: Kiyoto Nihonga Artists’ Designs for Takashimaya Department Store 1868–1912," Journal of Design History 17, no. 4 (2004). Related works on the subject of Japanese style include the exhibition catalog Art Nouveau in Japan 1900–1923: The New Age of Crafts and Design and on Art Deco the two essays by Anna Jackson, "Inspiration from the East" and "Art Deco in East Asia," both in the exhibition catalog from the Victoria & Albert exhibition, Art Deco 1910–1939. On the production of lacquer ware, see Jan Dees's PhD dissertation, Facing Modern Times: The Revival of Japanese Lacquer Art, 1890–1950.

There is a growing literature on mingei theory exemplified by two excellent books, Kim Brandt, Kingdom of Beauty: Mingei and the Politics of Folk Art in Imperial Japan and Yuko Kikuchi, Japanese Modernisation and Mingei Theory: Cultural Nationalism and Oriental Orientalism. Kikuchi has published several additional articles on the subject: "The Myth of Yanagi's Originality: The Formation of Mingei Theory in its Social and Historical Context," Journal of Design History 7, no. 4 (1994) and "Hybridity and the Oriental Orientalism of Mingei Theory," Journal of Design History 10, no. 4 (1997). These books and articles on mingei theory are complemented by Brian Moeran's article, "Bernard Leach and the Japanese Folk Craft Movement: The Formative Years, Journal of Design History 2, nos. 2–3 (1989).

On graphic design Richard Thornton's The Graphic Spirit of Japan is an essential overview. There is material on the Japanese avant-garde and graphic design in the Centre Pompidou exhibition catalog, Japon des Avant Gardes, 1910-1970. A related work is the monograph by Elizabeth de Sabato Swinton, The Graphic Art of Onchi Koshiro: Innovation and Tradition. Gennifer Weisenfeld has written a valuable book on the Japanese avant-garde group Mavo entitled Mavo: Japanese Artists and the Avant-Garde, 1905-1931 and has published a number of articles, book chapters, and Internet essays on Japanese graphic design in the 1920s and 193os that have been indispensible for this chapter. See her chapter, "Japanese Modernism and Consumerism: Forging the New Artistic Field of 'shôgyô Bijutsu'(Commercial Art)," in Elise Tipton, and John Clark, eds., Being Modern in Japan: Culture and Society from the 191os to the 193os and her articles "Touring Japan as Museum': NIPPON and Other Japanese Imperialist Travelogues," Positions: East Asia Cultures Critique 8, no. 3 (Winter 2ooo); "From Baby's First Bath': Kao Soap and Modern Japanese Commercial Design," The Art Bulletin 86, no. 3 (September 2004); "Publicity and Propaganda in 193os Japan: Modernism as Method," Design Issues 25, no. 4 (Fall, 2oo9); and the website "Selling Shiseido: Cosmetics Advertising & Design in Early 2oth-Century Japan," which is part of the MIT Visualizing Cultures project. James Fraser, Steven Heller, and Seymour Chwast, Japanese Modern: Graphic ·Design Between the Wars is most valuable as a compendium of visual material. The brief texts are mainly drawn from other sources but there is some helpful material not available elsewhere. Books on Japanese posters and packaging include Posters Japan, 180os-1980s and Packaging in Japan, 1858–1956. John Clark has written two useful essays on printing, Changes in Popular Reprographic Representation' and “Appendix: Chronology. Japanese Printing, Publishing and Prints 186os-193os," both published in the book he co-edited with Elise Tipton, Being Modern in Japan: Culture and Society from the 191os to the 193os. Books on the history of Japanese art and photography have also provided material relevant to this chapter's section on graphic design. These include John Clark, Modern Asian Art and his edited volume Modernity in Asian Art, Ann Tucker, The History of Japanese Photography; A History of Japanese Photography that the Japan Photographers' Association produced; and Penelope Mason's History of Japanese Art.

The literature in Western languages on design, manufacturing, or publishing in Japan's colonies, Taiwan and Korea, is limited. Yuko Kikuchi's discussion of mingei theory in Taiwan in her book Japanese Modernisation and Mingei Theory: Cultural Nationalism and Oriental Orientalism was especially helpful for an account of Taiwanese crafts. See also Shui-long Yen, Shui-long Yen: The Public Spirit: Beauty in the Making. There is little written in Western languages about design or crafts in Korea so I relied instead on literature related to entrepreneurship and manufacturing. Ki-Baik Ye's A New History of Korea was an excellent source for such material as it was for information about early newspaper and magazine publishing. On Korean industrialization during the Japanese period, I relied a lot on Atul Kohli's article "Where do High Growth Political Economies Come From? The Japanese Lineage of Korea's 'Developmental State," World Development 22, no. 9 (1994).