Besides its application to military problems, operations research was also applied to civil defense. In May 1939, the Ministry of Home Security established a Civil Defense Research Committee. One of its members, John Baker (dates unconfirmed), who joined the Research and Experiments Branch of the ministry when war broke out, set up a Design and Development Section to gather information on how buildings were affected by bombing. His interest in what happened when structures collapsed led to his design of the Morrison shelter. Named after the Home Secretary, Herbert Morrison, it was conceived to withstand the pressures of a collapsing building (Fig. 37.o8). The shelter was designed to protect people during air raids and was large enough for several individuals to sleep in if necessary. Produced with Churchill's support, it saved many lives during the blitz and the ensuing bombardment of VI rockets.

Baker's shelter followed by two years the Anderson shelter that William Patterson (dates unconfirmed) and Karl Kerrison (dates unconfirmed) designed in response to a request from the Home Office. It was a small curved structure of corrugated steel panels that was erected outside the home. One and a half million were distributed between February 1939 and the outbreak of war and a further two million were erected after the war began. Besides the design and construction of air raid shelters, the Ministry of Home Security also distributed gas masks, provided ambulances, and trained five million civilians as firewatchers and fire fighters. By September 1939, 38 million people had been issued gas masks, which they were asked to carry with them at all times in case of an attack. Beginning in 1939, 12 regional War Rooms and a single national War Room were set up to coordinate these efforts.

## Utility schemes and other designs for the home

The Utility Furniture Scheme that Hugh Dalton, President of the Board of Trade, inaugurated in 1942, had two purposes. One, stated officially in a set of rules and regulations, was to provide inexpensive furniture to people who had lost theirs due to bombing, and to newlyweds who were setting up a home for the first time. The other, stated less formally by Board of Trade officials, was to direct popular taste towards simple unadorned furniture designs that might also be manufactured for post-war homes.

The Board of Trade's second objective echoed one stated in a 1937 report, The Working Class Home, its Furnishings and Equipment, which had been issued by the Council for Art and Industry. The council was set up in 1934 with funding from the Board of Trade to enhance the public understanding of design and thereby improve the quality of British goods and raise public taste (see Chapter 23). A number of the ideas for the Utility scheme, in fact, were taken from this earlier council report.

Confronted with a shortage of materials, the Ministry of Supply introduced a rationing system in 1939 that included the control of timber, leather, and other materials affecting the furniture industry. Early in 1941, the Board of Trade introduced a program to produce Standard Emergency Furniture, which was undistinguished in either design or construction. When the Utility Furniture Scheme was launched the following year, more attention was paid to design and manufacturing quality. Dalton, a socialist to whom government regulation of manufacturing made sense, appointed a distinguished Advisory Committee on Utility Furniture, which included the well-known furniture designer Gordon Russell, a leading proponent of simple unadorned designs; Elizabeth Denby (1894– 1965), the low-cost housing advocate who had helped to prepare the 1937 report on furniture in the workingclass home; and John Gloag, a prominent design critic and commentator.

The committee approached nine designers and chose drawings by Edwin Clinch (dates unconfirmed) and Herbert Cutler (dates unconfirmed), both veterans of the companies in High Wycombe that produced furniture for the mass market. Their brief was to use as little material as possible and design pieces to be manufactured by the simplest and most economical processes. Utility furniture was first shown to the public in an exhibition of prototypes held in late 1942 and it became available when the first catalog was published in January 1943. As shown in the catalog, the furniture was divided into five sections—living room, bedroom, kitchen, nursery furniture, and items such as bookcases that might be used in different rooms. The pieces were made of hardwood oak or mahogany, while all panels were covered with thin strips of oak veneer. Pieces were designed to function as parts of suites as well as to stand alone. Besides chairs, tables, and beds, there were also chests, cabinets, and sideboards (Plate 83). About 70o firms throughout Britain manufactured all this furniture. Consequently, the production values varied considerably despite the Board of Trade's aspirations for high quality at a low price.

To complement the Utility furniture, Dalton introduced another Board of Trade commodity, pottery. To address a shortage, he conceived a plan for the production of inexpensive ceramics. Known as Victory Ware, the pieces were created by the Wedgwood firm, which had been making mass-produced pottery since the 18th century. As with Utility furniture, Dalton specified simplicity of form and he limited the colors to white, cream, or brown.

The numerous Wedgwood pieces were designed by the firm's art director, Victor Skellern (1909–1966), who introduced some techniques and devices that improved the ease of manufacture, storage, and cleaning, and strengthened the pottery's durability. His innovations included stackable cups and beakers, plate rims that stopped condiments from running off, and serving dishes with tab handles.

For Gordon Russell, the simple design of Utility furniture conformed to his long-held ideas of good taste. To develop the initial Utility designs further, Russell wrote to Dalton, proposing a Design Panel that would make further recommendations for new furniture designs. Dalton agreed and invited Russell to chair it. The panel, consisting primarily of architects and designers, first met in June 1944. It may well have been the inspiration for the more wide-ranging Council of Industrial Design that Dalton set up six months later to promote the improvement of design in British industry.

Once established, Russell's Design Panel met regularly, devoting most of its attention to the next phase of Utility furniture that would be manufactured when the war ended. Among the panel's members was the textile designer Enid Marx, who designed a number of fabrics for later Utility pieces. By the time Allied victory was declared in May 1945, the Design Panel had created some new furniture prototypes that were displayed at an exhibition entitled Design for the Home, which addressed the question of what domestic life in post-war Britain might be like.

Another contributor to the topic of post-war housing needs was Jane Drew (191-1996), a modernist architect and town planner who was a leading proponent of the European modern movement in the interwar years. During and after the war she was active in the design of social housing including housing for the 195ı Festival of Britain. From 1941 to 1943 she was a consultant to the British Commercial Gas Association and in 1944 she published jointly with the Association a small book entitled Kitchen Planning, with an introductory photomontage by John Heartfield.

The publication was intended to provide examples of rationally designed kitchens that would serve as alternatives to the poor organization of existing spaces. Following the tradition of American efficiency experts Catherine Beecher and Christine Frederick and the designer of the Frankfurt kitchen, the Austrian Greta Schütte-Lihotsky, Drew proposed a number of different models ranging from a prefabricated “package kitchen," which would combine all the essential equipment in a minimal space, to a larger work space that was separated from a family dining room by a low divider. Kitchen Planning also addressed the design and placement of gas water heaters, which were the principal concern of the publication's sponsor.