Hugh Dalton's socialist vision of a world in which standardized products would reduce the disparity between classes, while also making manufacturing less expensive and consequently goods more affordable, was evident as well in the scheme for a National Motor Vehicle (NMV) that the inventor and entrepreneur Leslie Hounsfield (1877–1957) had proposed. Beginning as a designer of pumps, Hounsfield produced a prototype for a small economical automobile as early as 1913. In 1920, he started a company, Trojan Ltd, that created a few small vehicles, which he named Trojan Utility Cars. After some initial interest in them, sales waned and the company survived for a period by manufacturing delivery vans.

In 1942, Hounsfield proposed to the British government that it support a utilitarian National Motor Vehicle, which he would build to standard government-approved designs that paralleled the programs for Utility furniture and clothing. Hounsfield did not intend the car for the motoring enthusiast but rather for the individual who only made occasional use of a vehicle, and then usually for relatively short trips. The body design Hounsfield envisaged was to be as normal as possible. In that sense, his idea for a small non-stylized car was not so different from Ferdinand Porsche's design for the Volkswagen or even the design of the Fiat soo. Although the Board of Trade did not take up the NMV scheme, Hounsfield's proposal nonetheless contributed to the vision of a post-war Britain where equal access to low-cost standardized housing and products would ensure a modicum of wellbeing for everyone.

## The Utility Clothing Scheme and wartime clothing

Throughout the war, the regulation of material for clothing was a major concern for the Board of Trade, as was the design of clothing with available resources. In fact, the Board had a Director-General of Civilian Clothing, Sir Thomas "Tommy" Barlow (1883-1964), from 1941 to 1945. In 1941, the Board introduced the

Utility Clothing Scheme, with the aim of producing clothes with significantly reduced resources and labor. Among the Board's numerous programs to provide clothing for everyone was the Couturier Scheme, whereby eight fashion designers who were members of the Incorporated Society of London Fashion Designers were asked to submit designs for four basic women's garments——a topcoat, a suit, an afternoon dress, and a more widely usable cotton dress. All the garments had to conform to Board regulations, be made with Utility fabrics, and bear the Civilian Clothing label, dubbed as two "cheeses" because of the letters' similarity to cheese wheels. From the designs submitted, a few were selected and were available in stores the following year. The designs received praise from Vogue magazine, but some criticized the scheme for going outside the fashion trade for designs from high-profile couturiers.

Another government design scheme was carried out in 1941 by the Design and Style Center of the Cotton Board, which commissioned textile designs from prominent artists including Duncan Grant, Ben Nicholson, and Graham Sutherland. More popular than these artistic fabrics, however, were the propaganda prints that used slogans and wartime imagery to boost patriotism and sales abroad. A large number were produced by Jacqmar, a London company founded in the 193os. Originally it supplied fine silks to French couture houses, but the directors realized that the company could make a profit by using the offcut pieces for scarves. Jacqmar's principal designer was Arnold Lever (dates unconfirmed), whose wartime propaganda prints were extremely popular. Some of Lever's scarf designs were turned into items of clothing such as blouses, aprons, and waistcoats by the fashion designer Bianca Mosca (d.o.b. unconfirmed-195o), who also participated in the Board of Trade's Couturier Scheme.

## Soviet Union

The Soviet Union was surprised by Germany's invasion in June 1941, which ruptured the non-aggression pact the two countries had signed only two years earlier. In the interwar years, Russia did not aggressively build up its military capabilities, although some efforts were made that enabled the country to rearm rapidly once the invasion had occurred.

At the end of 1936, a People's Commissariat of Defense Industry was formed to supervise the design and production of tanks, planes, firearms, and other military equipment. Six months before the Germans attacked, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet issued a decree that divided the Defense Industry Commissariat into four departments or separate commissariats, which dealt with aviation, shipbuilding, arms or general weaponry, and munitions.

Each commissariat oversaw a number of design offices and factories. As a consequence of Stalin's concentration on heavy industry in the Five-Year Plans that began in 1928, the Soviet Union had a number of factories capable of producing tanks, aircraft, and light vehicles as well as shipyards where large vessels could be built. A week after the German invasion, the Soviet Union's ruling bodies formed the State Defense Committee as a command and control center for the new wartime economy. Stalin was the chairman and had the power to approve or reject designs and prototypes for new weapons, which he did on more than one occasion. Some military assistance in the form of weapons came from the United States between 1941 and 1945 through the Lend-Lease program, but these contributions could only supplement Soviet production. However, support from Western allies enabled the Russians to concentiate on a few weapons including the $\mathrm { T } { - } 3 4$ medium tank, the GAZ R-1 light vehicle, and the Ilyushin II 2 jet fighter. At one point, Stalin used the phrase "war of motors," to indicate his belief that superiority in military technology would determine military victory. Given Stalin's power and temperament, military designers were always in danger of being sent to prison for designs that did not measure up to prevailing criteria and expectations and this did happen to some of them.

Weapons research and design actually began well before the creation of the Defense Industry Commissariat. In 1928, the year the First Five-Year Plan was inaugurated, a Tank Design Team was established in the Kharkov Locomotive Factory (KhPZ). Founded in 1895, the factory had produced about 20 percent of the Russian Empire's railway engines before the Bolshevik Revolution. After the Communists took power, it turned out tractors and then began to make tanks. In the 193os, the Tank Design Team became the T₂K Tank Design Bureau, which began to work on a light armored vehicle, the BT tank. Produced in large numbers between 1932 and 1941, the BT was known as the "convertible tank," because its tracks could be easily removed and replaced by a chain drive attached to the rear wheels on both sides, enabling it to travel on roads at high speeds. This feature had been designed by the American engineer and inventor J. Walter Christie (1865-1944) and incorporated into the Russian tank based on two prototypes of Christie's own Mi931 tank chassis that his company had illicitly shipped to the Soviet Union.

In 1937, following the establishment of the People's Commissariat of the Defense Industry, a new design bureau was created at the Kharkov factory to build a replacement for the BT light tank, which lacked firepower and armor, thus making it unsuitable as a main battle vehicle. The bureau was headed by the engineer Mikhail Koshkin (1898–1940), who oversaw the design of the $\mathrm { T } { - } 3 4 .$ considered to be the most effective medium tank of the entire war. In 1940, Koshkin died of pneumonia while driving prototypes of the $T _ { - 3 4 }$ on a grueling route from Kharkov to Moscow. Alexander Morozov (1904–1979), who was named Chief Designer of the $\mathrm { T } \mathord { - } 3 4$ Main Design Bureau, replaced him. Morozov had contributed to the design of the successful BT fast tanks and developed the drive-train design for the $T - 3 4$ while working under Koshkin between 1937 and 1940. As head of the $\mathrm { T } - 3 4$ Design Bureau, he presided over the factory's evacuation to the Ural Mountains and supervised the redesign of components for the $\mathrm { T } { - } 3 4$ to make production more efficient. Another important tank design bureau was the Experimental Design Mechanical Department, known by its Russian acronym OMKO. Located at the Leningrad "Bolshevik" Factory, it oversaw design changes in the British Vickers light infantry tank, called the $T _ { - 2 6 } ,$ and it conducted design studies for heavy tanks beginning in 193o. Several versions of an amphibious tank were also designed at the Leningrad factory.

When the war began, there were few $\mathrm { T } { - } 3 4 5$ but an all out effort by the military resulted in rapidly increasing numbers of them, which were produced at several different factories including the Stalingrad Tractor Factory. Morozov also led the development of the more heavily armored $\mathrm { T } _ { { ^ { - } 4 4 } }$ the T-34's successor, which began production in late 1944 but was not used operationally before the war ended. After the war, Morozov guided the development of other versions, the $\mathrm { T } { - } 5 4$ and $\mathrm { T } { - } 6 _ { 4 }$ which became staples of the post-war Soviet tank forces.

In March 1941, the Gorky Automobile Factory, which produced the GAZ line of automobiles and trucks before the war, introduced a utility vehicle for the Red Army. Initially called the GAZ R-I and then the $_ { \mathrm { G A Z - 6 4 } }$ its design was based on the American Bantam BRC, an early version of the American Jeep. Vitaly Grachev (dates unconfirmed), a young engineer, directed the design team, which produced the prototype in less than two months. The $_ { \mathrm { G A Z - 6 4 } }$ was in competition with another vehicle, the NATI "AR," designed at the NATI Research Institute. Though some considered the AR to be a more modern design, Stalin nonetheless chose the $_ { \mathrm { G A Z - 6 4 } }$ for the army. An improved version, the $G \mathrm { A } Z \ – 6 7 ;$ whose design was based on the American Willys Jeep, went into production in 1943 and remained in use for a decade.

The People's Commissariat of Aviation Industry was particularly active in fostering research and promoting production, building on an infrastructure of research and manufacturing that had begun in the late 19th century. The Soviet Union's most prominent aircraft designer in the early 193os was Andrei Tupolev (1888–1972), who created the gigantic but short-lived eight-engine Maxim Gorky plane in 1935 (see Chapter 27). Beginning in 1929, Tupolev was a leading designer at the Central Aerohydrodynamic Institute (TsAGI), where aviation research was conducted and major aircraft were designed. The Central Design Bureau there produced a number of bombers and some civilian airliners. A number of young aircraft designers including Pavel Sukhoi (1895-1975), Vladimir Petlyakov (1891–1942), Mikhail Gurevich $\left( { \mathrm { I } } 8 9 3 { \mathrm { - I } } 9 7 6 \right)$ and Sergei Ilyushin (1894-1877) worked under Tupolev. Among the planes they helped design were the heavy bombers TB-1 and TB-3 as well as the Petlyakov Pe-8, created under Vladimir Petlyakov's leadership. Made primarily of duralumin, it was the only four-engine bomber built during the war.

In 1938, Sukhoi replaced Tupolev as head of the department of design, although he left the following year to head his own engineering and design office, OKB Sukhoi (Sukhoi Experimental Design Bureau). There he began work on the Su-6, a single-seat armored fighter aircraft. He completed two prototypes but the Su-6 did not go into production. Despite its excellent flight tests, Stalin selected its rival, the Ilyushin II-2, as the military's principal ground attack airplane and consequently it was manufactured in record numbers. Sergei Ilyushin and his team designed the Ilyushin II-2 after Ilyushin formed his own studio, OKB Ilyushin (Ilyushin Experimental Design Bureau) in 1935.

Another studio, OKB Lavochkin (Lavochkin Experimental Design Bureau) was created in 1937 by the aircraft designer Sergei Lavochkin (1900-196o), who played a principal role in the design of one of the Soviet Air Force's stronger fighter planes, the La-5, later improved as the La-7. Though considered inferior to German fighters at high altitudes, the La-5 was more successful in combat closer to the ground. Lavochkin actually worked on the plan with two other designers, Vladimir Gorbunov (dates unconfirmed) and Mikhail Gudkov (dates unconfirmed), who together headed a new experimental design bureau that was established