in 1939. A significant factor in the design of the La-5 was Gorbunov's plan that the plane have an all-wood structure to counter the lack of aluminum and facilitate increased output. In the La-7, some of the wooden parts were replaced with alloy components.

Later iterations of another fighter plane, the MIG, gained prominence after World War II, but the first of this series, the MIG-1 and MIG-3, saw service during the war. The MIG-1 originated in the experimental design bureau of Nikolai Polikarpov (r892–1944), a pioneer designer of Soviet fighter planes. Though Artiom Mikoyan (1905-1970) and Mikhail Gurevich, both of whom had worked in Polikarpov's studio, are credited as the designers of the MIG, other engineers contributed as well. Mikoyan was put in charge of the project at Aviakhim plant No. I, where an experimental studio was set up. Although the original prototype had a number of flaws, it was nonetheless rushed into production and most of the few that were manufactured before the German invasion of the Soviet Union were destroyed in the initial battles of Operation Barbarossa. The MIG-3 remained a demanding aircraft for pilots even after substantial modifications of the MIG-I were made. It was different from the older fighters and few pilots were sufficiently trained to fly it. The plane was more effective at higher altitudes than lower ones, where it frequently had to engage the Germans, although performance improved when the MIG-Is were reassigned to other engagements where low altitude combat was less important.

The Experimental Design Bureaus that Sukhoi, Ilyushin, Lavochkin, Polikarpov, and other aircraft designers set up were part of a system of small statefunded design offices that the People's Commissariat of Aviation Industry established. The directors of these bureaus worked on the conception and prototyping of advanced technological projects and the prototypes selected by the government would then be assigned to factories for mass-production.

Designers were also arrested for producing failed designs, sometimes due to unrealistic Five-Year

Plan expectations. They were either sent to Moscow's Butyrka Prison, where they worked in a Special Design Bureau operated by the Secret Police, or to one of the gulags, or Soviet labor camps, which housed secret research and development laboratories known as sharashkas. Scientists and engineers who worked in the sharaskas were selected from various camps and prisons and assigned to work on scientific or technical problems for the state. Among the sharashka scientists were the previously mentioned aviation engineers Andrei Tupolev, Vladmir Petlyakov, and Nikolai Polikarpov, as well as others who were prominent in their respective fields.

## Japan

Participation in the Allies' victory in World War I empowered the Japanese to expand their sphere of Asian influence, particularly in China. Following the war, Japanese leaders began to define a multi-pronged agenda to prepare for the possibility of future conflicts. Among the government's considerations was securing an adequate supply of natural resources, which Japan, a small island nation, was lacking. Other considerations included strengthening the nation's military capabilities, motivating the populace to support state goals, and devising a plan to mobilize industry, the military, and the economy if necessary.

Japan began an aggressive military engagement in Asia in 193ı, when its army independently attacked Chinese troops in Manchuria. The establishment of Manchukuo as a puppet state, following China's defeat, empowered the army at home. Six years later, in July 1937, it started a full-scale war with China without the support of the parliament, which did not challenge the action but instead began to prepare the country for a possibly wider conflict. The need for modernizing the military arsenal was made clear when the Russians routed the army at a battle on the border between Manchuria and Mongolia in 1939.

In 1938, Prince Kono Fumimaro, who had headed the parliament since 1937 and had gone along