the targets were within striking range. Later versions were designed for launching from coastal airbases or submarines equipped with catapults, although this never occurred. Damage that the Ohkas might have inflicted on American ships was mitigated by the fact that American fighter aircraft destroyed most of the mother planes, although a few gliders did hit their targets, causing considerable destruction.

## Daily life goods at home and abroad

Policies for the production of daily life goods had several purposes. First was the Ministry of Commerce and Industry's interest in developing export markets for Japanese products. This dovetailed with the Kono cabinet's New Order that was to initially organize domestic life but to eventually regulate the life of everyone living in a future East Asia under Japanese dominance. The introduction of new daily life practices was coordinated by the imperial Rule Assistance Association (IRRA), which had been formed to carry out the tenets of the New Order. A leading figure in the daily life movement was Miki Kiyoshi (1897–1945), who proposed the formation of the IRAA's Culture Section, which was responsible for daily life concerns. However, the idea of daily life culture was somewhat vague and extremely broad in that it included, besides the design and production of consumer goods, activities ranging from art exhibitions to day care centers and cooperative cooking.

Conformity to shared social norms was a central concern for the Imperial Rule Assistance Association, and one proposal to enforce this was embodied in the idea of national dress, which various ministries had been interested in since the early 193os. In early 1940, a committee organized by the Ministry of Welfare and the army produced several designs for men. Such clothing was adopted widely—over 1o percent of Japanese men were wearing it in the early 194os—unlike the standard dress designs that the Ministry of Welfare produced for women. One purpose of both national and standard dress was to save cloth and another was to create a sense of public uniformity, but the army had an additional agenda, which was to break down the distinction between military and civilian clothing.

Also central to the concerns of the Imperial Rule Assistance Association were the goods that were part of daily life. In this regard, Yanagi Soetsu, founder of the mingei movement and also head of the Japan Folk Crafts Association, sought to ally the aesthetics and culture of mingei with the wartime needs that the New Order promulgated. A vital part of Yanagi's goal was the argument that inexpensive mass-produced handicrafts possessed other virtues besides practical ones. He emphasized the idea of "proper beauty," which he believed should be inherent in all that Japan produced so the world could see where the nation's true values lay. Among his suggestions for improving daily life objects was the revival of Japan's rural economy through the development of craft enterprises or shin mingei (new mingei), a topic of great interest to New Order officials. To cultivate regional handicrafts, Yanagi proposed a Local Handicrafts Promotion Association that would be supported by various ministries.

The Japanese Folk Arts Association was just one of the organizations concerned with the development of a new daily life culture. Another was the previously mentioned Industrial Arts Research Institute, which was part of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. To support the New Order's demand for daiyohin or substitute products made of bamboo and other materials—wood, paper, and clay—that would replace metal, which was needed to support the war effort, the institute organized a series of exhibits that included a public competition of 1941 for what it called simple and healthy products. The results were displayed at Tokyo's Takashimaya Department Store in an exhibition entitled Exhibition of Household Products for the Nation. The goods on display included furniture, toys, trays, bowls, and other household items, mostly made of wood or bamboo. As Yuko Kikuchi notes, these goods were to embody four basic qualities: simplicity and functionality, rational design, appropriate use of materials, and affordability. Although the Industrial Arts Research Institute and Yanagi's Japanese Folk Arts Association were compatible in a number of ways, where they differed was in the former's promotion of modernity rather than tradition as the basis for design. In the 1941 exhibition, however, the differences were somewhat conflated, given that simplicity in Japan was a valued quality of both traditional and modern products and that the objects on display had to use substitute materials, which included wood and bamboo, rather than metal—normally a sign of modernity in product design.

Besides its practical application, bamboo also took on the symbolic representation of simplicity, health, and thriftiness, qualities that were seen as virtues of a nation at war. Kawai Kanjiro (189o-1966), a well-known potter and activist in the mingei crafts movement, was interested in bamboo and started a business in Kyoto called the Japanese Bamboo Bed Manufacturing Company. It was staffed by Taiwanese craftsmen—specialists in bamboo products, who made bamboo beds of local wood. Supported by this company, Kawai designed his own bamboo furniture for domestic use. Like the beds, Kawai's furniture was also made by Taiwanese.

Taiwan was Japan's first overseas colony and during the 193os it was subject to a policy of kominka, a series of reforms intended to integrate the Taiwanese into a greater Japanese empire (see Chapter 36). The same policy was introduced in Korea. Consequently, Japan took an interest in both craft production and the potential for industry in the two colonies. Officials were especially interested in bamboo goods that they could promote for export, while others products such as dolls for the traditional puppet theater were left to languish.

Bamboo was also central to the contribution that French designer Charlotte Perriand made to Japanese design. Perriand had previously worked in Le Corbusier's office, where she collaborated with him and his cousin Pierre Jeanneret on a line of tubular steel and leather furniture in the late 192os (see Chapter 22).

In early 194o, the Japanese Ministry of Commerce and Culture invited her to Japan to assist with the design of goods for export. The invitation came through the architect Sakakura Junzo, who had known Perriand when he worked for Le Corbusier in Paris and who designed the modernist Japanese Pavilion for the 1937 Paris World's Fair. Surely, Perriand knew that Japan had invaded China and was at war there but it is not clear whether she was aware of the discourse around the New Order and the growing militarization that was then at the core of Japanese domestic politics. Like Bruno Taut, who spent several years in Japan in the early 193os, Perriand was critical of Japanese attempts to imitate Western designs. Thus she, like Taut, adopted an Orientalist view that romanticized traditional Japanese culture and crafts. This conformed to the mingei philosophy of Yanagi Soetsu, who was her guide as she traveled around Japan during the first part of her stay, visiting museums, factories, shops, and other sites.

Her conclusions and recommendations were summarized in an exhibit, Tradition, Sélection, Création, which she curated in spring 1941 at the Takashimaya department stores in Tokyo and Osaka before she departed. The exhibit included three categories of products that she deemed worthy of export. First were the simple artifacts of craftsmen, which she believed could be easily adapted for Western use and modernist taste. Next, she identified materials and techniques such as traditional weaving methods that could be adopted for new uses. And finally there were the furniture pieces she designed herself, some completely new and others based on already existing designs. Bamboo was her preferred material and its application included a bamboo and wood version of the tubular steel chaise longue she had helped design in Le Corbusier's office (Fig. 37.11). This and several other pieces she designed including a bed frame and a bamboo table that supported a tray of the same material were made into prototypes for the exhibition but were never produced. Perriand shared an interest in folk crafts