graphs, and maps to simplify complex information. There was also a Special Exhibits Division, responsible for three-dimensional projects. The architect Eero Saarinen (1910–1961) headed it, while a Design Section was run by the stage designer Jo Mielziner (1901–1976). Among the major projects that the Visual Presentation Branch undertook was creating a full range of graphic services for the San Francisco conference where the United Nations was first discussed as well as the architectural arrangements for the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials.

## The Office of Scientific Research and Development

In June 1940, President Roosevelt established the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC), whose purpose was to conduct scientific research related to weapons of war. The committee was proposed to him by Vannevar Bush (1890-1974), then President of the Carnegie Corporation and previously an eminent engineer at MIT. Bush, in fact, had directed a laboratory that produced the Differential Analyzer, an early mechanical device for mathematical calculations. During its first year of operation, the NDRC put in place a research structure that would continue with some changes throughout the war, but there were also problems with converting scientific research into military technology. Bush believed these could be alleviated by making the NDRC an advisory body to a new agency, the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD), and this occurred when that agency was created in June 1941. The OSRD was divided into an expanded number of divisions that produced many useful inventions. Among its major accomplishments were the further development of radar, advanced methods of fire control for anti-aircraft guns, and the creation of the atomic bomb.

The NDRC and OSRD worked with approximately 3oo research and industrial laboatories around the United States, contracted for more than 2,ooo projects, and produced more than 2oo new devices.

Among the university laboratories, three at MIT were prominent. The MIT Radiation Laboratory devised a system that enabled aircraft to detect the location of other objects using electromagnetic waves. The first success with such a device in the United States, the SCR-72o Airborne Radar, was installed in British and American planes and proved invaluable for night fighting as well as for the basic British air defense as previously described. An improved system, SCR-584, the first automatic microwave tracking system that directed anti-aircraft guns, enabled British gunners to shoot down about 85 percent of the German Vr rockets that were fired at London in 1944. Included with the system was a proximity fuse developed by the NDRC that detonated an explosive device when it came close to a target. Besides the SCR-584, the lab's activities expanded to produce more advanced radar systems and other products. In 1942, Ivan Getting (1912–2003), one of the engineers who developed the SCR-584, became the head of a new Systems Division in the Radiation Laboratory.

Opposing the tendency to break the problem of fire control into separate parts with multiple contractors, Getting proposed an integrated systems approach whereby all the parts—radar, computers, and fire control devices—would be designed together, putting issues of technical compatibility before the creation of individual components. 'The challenge was to connect radar with fire control mechanisms, which Getting met by designating the Radiation Laboratory as a "system integrator." The product that resulted from his new approach was the Mark 56 gun fire control system, which required two operators above deck to locate targets and direct a radar antenna, while calculations, managed by two additional operators, occurred in computers below. Despite the advanced design methods, however, the Mark 56 did not make it into production in time for wartime use.

Earlier work on systems design had been carried out by another MIT engineer, Harold Hazen (1901-1980), whose emphasis was on human-machine interaction in a system rather than on the conditions for designing a system's technological components. Hazen thought it essential to design equipment that suited human capabilities rather than try to adapt humans to existing devices. He wrote a seminal memo on the subject in May 1941, where he argued that the capacity of the operator was a necessary determinant for the design of a system's mechanical parts, and he called for simulated models that could represent human performance when a system was being designed.

The Servomechanisms Laboratory, or Servo Lab, directed by an electrical engineer, Gordon S. Brown (1907-1996), a pioneer in research on servo controls, was also concerned with system design. It specialized in automatic aiming and fire control systems that were designed to help a gun operator hit a target. The lab's work began with the navy's interest in servomechanisms—sensors that can correct the performance of a mechanism through a feedback process. Early research in the lab included the operation of servomechanisms for the remote control of anti-aircraft guns. This was necessitated by increased aircraft speed, which required higher rates of gun movement. The lab also managed Project Whirlwind, a navy-funded project headed by Jay Forester (b. 1918), who would later lead the team that created the Limits to Growth model for the Club of Rome in 1972. The aim of Project Whirlwind was to produce a flight simulator to replicate flight motion, with an instrument panel that would be updated continually by an analog computer. Such a computer, the first that was entirely digital, was built but did not work accurately and could not be made more effective without a considerably larger machine that lab scientists were unable to build at the time.

The Instrumentation Laboratory, headed by mechanical engineer Charles Stark Draper (1901–1987), worked on guidance and control systems. Draper began teaching aircraft instrumentation at MIT in the late 192os and became a leading expert in the field. A key invention of Draper's lab, the Mark 14 Gunsight, was a small optical device designed in collaboration with the

Servo Lab that used a gyro mechanism to improve the accuracy of anti-aircraft guns.

OSRD's largest program was the Manhattan Project, which produced the atom bomb. It was essentially a research effort by scientists who were concerned with problems of detonation and explosive force rather than weaponry that required human operators. Besides the Manhattan Project, however, OSRD's research was essentially directed to devices that required human operation. Many were installed on ships, planes, or tanks. Considerable research was dedicated to fire control, whose purpose was to enable a gun to hit a fast-moving target, and this work resulted in many useful devices. OSRD's Division 7 produced a number of gunsights while Division 14 specialized in radar range finders. Such finders increased a turret gunner's tracking ability fourfold by alleviating the need to estimate the firing range.

The NDRC also contracted with the Hazeltine Service Company to produce a mine detector called the SCR-625, which became standard equipment for ground troops. Another device for infantry soldiers was a portable flamethrower, an improvement on the cumbersome models that were used in World War I. The OSRD cooperated as well with the Joint Aircraft Committee and the Joint Radio Board, which set up objectives for the design of headphones, headsets, and an improved microphone that was quickly put into production.

OSRD's Division of Aviation Medicine studied the causes of aircraft accidents and recommended the redesign of airplane seats, control panels, safety harnesses, and escape hatches. Complementing that research were other efforts to understand the relation between the design of aircraft equipment and those who used it. A major center for such research was the Army Air Force's Aero Medical Lab in Dayton, Ohio. One problem it addressed was the design of the B-17's control panel, where pilots sometimes confused the switches that controlled the flaps and landing gear because of their proximity and similarity of shape. This