the technology that led to the further advances in radar. Vannevar Bush regarded operations research with some hesitation, as he believed that the close cooperation with military commanders that it entailed was incompatible with his own management strategy for OSRD which sought to insulate civilian scientific research from military or government interference. Consequently OSRD had little involvement with the applications of operations research in the service branches. The navy's Bureau of Ordnance was the first to apply operations research's techniques of analysis, focusing on the study of anti-submarine warfare. An Anti-submarine Warfare Operations Research Group (ASWORG) was formed to improve the efficacy of attacks on enemy submarines in the North Atlantic. The group quickly published a search and attack manual and addressed two other areas—the placement of depth charge explosions and the creation of barrier patrols to better detect submarines moving from Japan to Germany. The success of AWORG led to the formation of the navy's Operational Research Group, which included subgroups related to submarines, aircraft, anti-aircraft, amphibious operations, and strategies to counter kamikaze attacks.

The Army Air Force initially employed operations research to improve the bombing accuracy of the Eighth Air Force, which was stationed in England. Operational Research Sections (OAS) were also attached to other air force commands. 'They operated loosely in relation to the needs of each command rather than within a single group, as was the case in the navy. The OAS in Libya developed a major concept in defensive aerial gunnery, called leading toward the tail, which meant that the gunner would aim to hit the back of an enemy aircraft rather than its front. Operations research sections also helped the Army Signal Corps with radio direction finding and radar. While used effectively in the American military, operations research did not play the crucial role it did in Britain, where it was central to intense aerial combat with Germany as it also was to the development and refinement of Britain's air defense system.

## The first computers

Interest in the computer as a machine to manage large numbers of calculations began well before World War II, but the wartime need to handle complex calculations accelerated its development. A major impetus was the requirement for firing tables that enabled a gunner firing at a target miles away to achieve a reasonable degree of accuracy. Firing tables provided the gunner with appropriate angle settings and indicated the firing range for a given piece of artillery. Such tables, which were tailored to particular types of guns and projectiles, could also determine the velocity of a projectile when it hit its target.

Vannevar Bush's Differential Analyzer reduced the time for making calculations, but it lacked speed. Progress was made with the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator (ASCC), known as the Mark I, which was both larger than previous machines and was also the first computer to be unveiled to the general public. Many scholars consider it to have heralded the beginning of the computing age. It was conceived by Howard Aiken (1900–1973), who began to explore mechanical computing devices while a doctoral student at Harvard. Aiken interested IBM in a calculating machine, and the company's president, Thomas Watson, agreed to provide IBM engineers for its design, although most of the funding came from the navy.

Aiken operated as a consultant to the engineers, sketching out desired functions and leaving them to develop the hardware, which incorporated the punch card technology that was an IBM specialty. While Aiken concentrated on the machine's computational functions, Watson determined its appearance. He insisted that the machine, which was more than 5I feet long and 8 feet high, be encased in polished steel and glass, thus establishing a visual rhetoric for future computers of that scale. The Mark I was the largest machine of its kind ever constructed and was able to perform a series of programmed operations without error. After it was finished in early 1943 it was moved to Harvard, where it began doing calculations for the