navy's Bureau of Ships in early 1944, several months before its public dedication. It was also used to perform calculations for the construction of the atomic bomb.

Although IBM made a strong commitment to the Mark 1, Watson viewed it more as a military effort than a product for commercial exploitation. Related research was also underway elsewhere. Engineers at Bell Telephone Labs developed a series of computing machines that used metallic devices or relays, which assumed an open or closed position to control an electric current. The catalyst there was George R. Stibitz (1904– 1995), a mathematician who built a computing device in 1937 that could perform mathematical functions with relay technology. Company executives agreed to finance a larger model and in 194o the Complex Number Calculator (CNC) was completed. It marked a significant advance in computing, since commands could be sent to the computer over telephone lines from a teletype machine, which functioned as the first computer terminal. Completed calculations could be returned to the machine via the same phone lines. The system could accommodate several terminals although only one could be used at a time. Despite this success, however, Bell Labs was not interested in building general-purpose computers and concentrated instead on wartime projects such as the M-9 Gun Director, which helped a gunner track a moving target. Stibitz became a member of the National Defense Research Committee and continued his research on computers, developing several improved versions of the CNC, which were helpful in calculating weapons trajectories.

Despite Stibitz's work for the NDRC, neither that organization nor the OSRD fully recognized the future potential of computing machines, hence the development of the machine that inaugurated the computer revolution occurred outside the principal wartime research organization. The need for more efficient means of preparing artillery firing tables was the impetus for the design of ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer), an electronic digital computer that is generally considered to have ushered in the era of high-speed electronic computing. It was many times faster than its predecessors and capable of being reprogrammed to solve a wider range of problems. Whereas the navy funded most of Mark I's design and development, ENIAC was financed by the Army Ordnance Department, which planned to use the computers in its Ballistic Research Laboratory.

Design and production took place at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School of Engineering, which had an established relation with the Ballistic Research Lab. The Moore School had previously trained several hundred women to do trajectory computations for the Lab with desk calculators. They were known as "computers" before the name was applied to machines, However, their efforts could not keep up with the need for firing tables, and the Ballistics Lab became interested in the project for an electronic digital computer that was developed by John Mauchly (1907-198o), a physics professor, and J. Presper Eckert (1919-1995), an electrical engineer. It was ultimately built at the Moore School with the involvement of many others besides Mauchly and Eckert. Construction began in July 1943 and ENIAC ran its first programs in December 1945. Its calculation speed was more than 1,ooo times faster than previous electro-mechanical machines such as the Mark I. The final form consisted of several different types of units that were connected to each other by wires and arranged in a horseshoe shape around a large room. Though men designed ENLAC, its programmers were all women, who had to master the machine's mathematical complexities and its temperamental operation.

## The home front

The 1942 order of the War Production Board to drastically reduce the number of consumer products that American companies manufactured contributed to the feeling of sacrifice that the government was asking of all Americans. No automobiles were produced until the war ended nor were the abundant consumer goods from the 193os such as washing machines and dryers,