dishwashers, and other home appliances. Metals like aluminum, tin, and steel were required for military production, leaving substitute materials such as plastic for domestic goods. The demand for austerity was not as severe as it was in Britain, but nonetheless, people had to radically alter their consumption habits. There were some interesting new materials such as Saran and Cellophane, both thin plastic sheets that were perfect for wrapping, while plastics of different grades were adopted for as many products as possible. It was regarded as unpatriotic to promote consumption, hence corporate advertising emphasized what companies were doing to help the war effort.

Given the required austerity of the war years, it is no surprise that the government and commercial manufacturers encouraged the public to look ahead to a better time after the war. In a speech of 1942, President Roosevelt told Americans that the country was fighting for a brighter future, which he did not explicitly delineate but which certainly implied a life of material comfort. Industrial designers, especially the prominent designers of the 193os, played an important part in promoting a post-war future of high consumption. Both Walter Dorwin Teague and Raymond Loewy agreed with the National Association of Manufacturers, who opposed the Ncw Deal, and Teague espoused corporate planning as a better way to stimulate consumption than any government program. He even went so far as to claim that government planning was an impediment to social evolution.

Designers also sought work from companies they hoped to aid with designs for the post-war world. Brook Stevens, for example, prepared drawings that showed how a Willys Jeep could be redesigned as a civilian vehicle, while also proposing a streamlined bubble car that looked like a vehicle from a Buck Rogers film. There were proposals for flying cars and predictions of streamlined personal commuter aircraft as one could see in Du Pont's promotional booklet, Glimpses into the Wonder World of Tomorrow.

One topic that provoked considerable discussion was the House of Tomorrow, which electronics manufacturers foresaw as a container for appliances to alleviate the drudgery of housework. Among these wondrous new artifacts-to-be was the 1942 "Day After Tomorrow's Kitchen," a prototype designed by H. Creston Doner (1903-1991), Director of the Design Department at the Libby-Owens-Ford Glass Company. The company's promotional kitchen featured an open plan, high-tech appliances, streamlined fixtures, and an abundant use of glass. Several full-scale models were sent around the country to major department stores where customers had a chance to vote on the features they would most like to see in a future kitchen of their own. In truth, American taste was considerably more conservative than the L-O-F futuristic kitchen would have suggested. Although new appliances were popular in post-war America, the same preferences for traditional home and furniture styles that dominated the 192os and 193os were still very much in evidence when the war ended and people began spending again.

## Propaganda

Printed propaganda, whether posters, leaflets, pamphlets, newspapers, or magazines, received considerable competition during World War II from new media such as radio and sound film. Advances in aircraft technology also made possible a much more intensive use of propaganda leaflets dropped over enemy territory than was possible in World War I. The power of radio to put audiences in direct contact with their leaders and the capacity of film to incorporate sound and image to bring viewers a sense of immediacy were ably demonstrated in the interwar years by Germany and Italy, both of which formed propaganda ministries after their authoritarian leaders Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler came to power in 1922 and 1933 respectively. By the time the two Axis powers were at war with Britain, Russia, and the United States, they had finely-honed propaganda apparatuses that functioned smoothly until they began to face the possibility of defeat.

The British and American governments wound