agencies of the government such as the Canadian Food Board, the Ministry of Labor, and the Ministry of Munitions and Supply produced more than 7oo propaganda posters. A number of the government posters were commissioned by the painter and commercial artist Albert Cloutier (1902-1965), who worked for the War Information Board. He called upon Canadian graphic artists such as Henry Eveleigh (1909–1999), Eric Aldwinckle (1909–198o), and Roger Couillard. Cloutier also relied heavily on the large advertising agencies that were based mainly in Toronto. Several seminal posters produced in bilingual editions under Cloutier's direction were Eveleigh's "Allons-y Canadiens!" ("Lets Go Canada!"), which depicted a soldier with his gun and bayonet thrust forward, and one by Eric Aldwinckle and Cloutier, "Notre Armée a Besoin de Bons Canadiens" ("Our Army Needs Good Canadians"), which depicted a contemporary soldier pulling up the front wheel of his motorcycle as if he were a medieval knight on horseback.

Another source of posters was the National Film Board of Canada, which was established in 1939 based on a recommendation by the Scottish documentary film pioneer, John Grierson (1898–1972). When Canada entered the war in 1939, Grierson headed the Film Board, whose principal focus was propaganda films, many of them directed by Grierson himself. In 1940, the Film Board launched a series of theatrical propaganda shorts, Canada Carries On, which was followed by The World in Action, a series that was strongly influenced by the American March of Time newsreels. Harry Mayerovitch (1910-2004), who created his posters under the pen name Mayo, headed the National Film Board's Graphic Arts Division, which not only produced posters for films but also for a broad range of other causes. Mayerovitch did many of the posters for the Canada Carries On and The World in Action series. Sympathetic to left-wing causes, he was influenced by the heroic realism of 192os and 193os leftist painters. This was evident in his 1943 poster for the film Coal Face, which depicts a miner with huge hands holding a drill. To print his posters, Mayerovitch employed serigraphy, an inexpensive medium but also one that highlighted his gestural graphic style.

Leading wartime poster designers in Australia included Percy Trompf and James Northfield, both well-known travel poster and advertising artists, as well as Norman Lindsay, who had worked previously in almost every visual medium. In New Zealand, advertising artist Albert James O'Dea (1918–1986) did an airbrush poster in 1944 for the Victory Loan. With its prominent soldier's head that recalled similar images by Abram Games, it was one of the country's strongest war posters. The Victory Loan poster was part of a series that O'Dea produced to raise money through the Liberty and Victory Loan programs. His styles and themes varied from the gritty close-up visage of a fatigued soldier to the metaphorical image of a swastika and Japanese flag being pierced by an Allied bayonet. Other New Zealand commercial artists who contributed to the war effort were Marcus King, known for his travel posters in the 193os, and B. E. Pike (dates unconfirmed). In South Africa, more than 4oo propaganda posters were produced for recruitment, national security, war production, and arousing opposition to the enemy.

## Soviet Union

Immediately after Germany launched Operation Barbarossa, its surprise attack on the Soviet Union, on June 22, 1941, Soviet propagandists went to work. The day after the attack, artists Mikhail Cheremnykh (1890–1962), Vladimir Denisovsky (1901–1981), and Pavel Sokolov-Skalia (1899–1961) proposed to Alexander Gerasimov, head of the Soviet Artists' Union, that a propaganda poster studio be formed. They envisioned it as similar to the ROSTA news agency studio that so effectively produced stenciled posters in support of the Red Army during the Russian Civil War (see Chapter zo). Cheremnykh had been an active artist in that studio and was also a founder of the satirical magazine Krokodil in 1922.

With approval from the Communist Party's Department of Agitation and Propaganda, the Tass

Studio was set up under the auspices of the Tass News Agency. Denisovsky headed it and Sokolov-Skalia was the Artistic Director. The original Literary Editor was A. Kulagin, who was followed by Osip Brik, a close collaborator with Alexander Rodchenko and Vladimir Mayakovsky in the avant-garde LEF group in the 192os. Initially, the Tass Studio produced single paintings for display along with stenciled posters but the paintings were soon discontinued in favor of the wider distribution the posters enabled.

The studio adopted two styles, one of serious painting that derived from Socialist Realism, and the other a satirical style that had its roots in the long tradition of Russian cartoons and caricatures in the popular press. Both styles were evident in the earlier ROSTA posters as well. Regardless of the style, each poster was a collaboration between an artist and a poet, who together produced a sketch of the image with a related caption. The proposal had to be approved by a representative of the People's Commissariat of Education before work could begin on the poster. Themes were initially drawn from political directives or official reports, but soon Stalin's speeches became a prime source of material. Once a sketch was approved, the stencils, which could range in number from 12 to as many as 65, were cut and the posters were painted by hand.

Subject matter ranged from depictions of Nazi plundering and brutality to images of Soviet soldiers and people from the different Soviet republics heroically beating back the Germans. The posters of Nazi brutality would have been especially effective since many Soviet citizens, unlike the British, had experienced it at first-hand. Artists who created posters in the realist style tended to have backgrounds as painters rather than poster designers. They included Denisovsky and Sokolov-Skalia as well as Victor Ivanov (1909–1968); Yuri Pimenov (1903–1977), a member of the liberal OST group of artists in the 192os and 1930s; Georgy Savitsky (1887-1949), who belonged to the AKhRR group of realist painters; and Mikhail Soloviev (1905–1990), another AKhRR painter who had been a student of Sokolov-Skalia's.

Among the satirical artists, the most prominent were the Kukriniksy, a group of three artists—Porfiry Krylov (1902–1990), Mikhail Kuprianov (1903–1991), and Nikolai Sokolov (1903-2ooo)—who worked together as a collective. They met when they were students at the Soviet art and design school Vkhutemas in the 192os. Although experts at caricature, the Kukriniksy's drawings and posters frequently mingled comic and serious elements. Besides their posters, they also published cartoons in Soviet newspapers. These tended to be humorous caricatures of Hitler, Goebbels, or other Nazi leaders. In one drawing, they portrayed Hitler as a gunner with Goebbels as a machine gun spewing out propaganda and in another, called "Lie-Locator", they showed Goebbels speaking into two microphones that replaced the ears of a donkey who was writing down what Goebbels said with its tail. A particularly strong drawing, which was also made into a Tass poster, showed Hitler ordering rows of troops to march across the Russian steppes as they progressively turned into swastikas and then crosses that marked their graves. The Kukriniksy's persistent ridicule of Hitler is also evident in a poster from 1944, when the Russians were routing the Germans after their triumph at Stalingrad the year before. A general reporting to Hitler for further orders is greeted by Hitler whose head is on his chair with his buttocks facing the general as if they were his face. Other artists who created posters in a satirical style include Mikhail Cheremnykh and Victor Deni; Boris Efimov, a cartoonist for Krokodil and other satirical magazines who drew the famous caricature of Goebbels as Mickey Mouse; and Peter Sarkisian (1922–1970), an active designer who created more than 70 posters for the Tass Studio.

The Tass Studio's chief rival in poster production was the state publishing house, Iskusstvo, which published fewer posters—88o compared to the Tass Studio's 1,24o—but whose total in distribution was far more since all the Iskusstvo posters were mechanically