produced by offset lithography. Iskusstvo employed some of the same artists that worked for the Tass Studios, but also many who did not. The latter included Alexei Kokorekin (19o6-1959), among whose posters were several that depicted angry workers calling for more production; Dementy Shmarinov (1907-1999), a painter who also illustrated Russian literary classics such as Crime and Punishment and War and Peace; Victor Koretsky (1909–1998); and Irakly Toidze (1902-1985). Victor Ivanov created posters of his own for Iskusstvo, while also collaborating with Olga Burova (1911–d.o.d. unconfimred). A significant difference between the Tass Studio posters and others is that the former were always developed together with a short poetic text, thus the images possessed a narrative quality not necessarily present in the Iskusstvo designs.

Though images of Stalin were pervasive in Socialist Realist paintings of the 193os and beyond, the Russian leader was relatively infrequently portrayed in wartime propaganda posters and far less than Hitler was in Germany. Whereas German propagandists persisted in adopting Hitler's portrait as a national metaphor that represented Germany itself, in the Soviet Union, Stalin urged Russians to protect the Soviet motherland, setting the tone for this theme in a seminal speech of late 1941 when he called upon the Soviet people to defend "holy Russia." His focus on the motherland generated a key theme of Soviet propaganda—the parallel between heroic battles of the past and those of the current war. Several posters included images of great fighters of Russian history such as Alexander Suvorov, an 18th-century general; Vasily Chapayev, a hero of the Russian Civil War; and General Mikhail Kutuzov, who drove Napoleon's army from Moscow in 1812. A 1942 poster by Ivanov and Burova showed Russian soldiers hunkered down behind their cannons and machine guns with the specter of Kutuzov behind them.

In 193os Socialist Realist paintings, women were normally painted as strong contributors to the Soviet state. Artists showed them driving tractors, pitching hay, and cheering Stalin at public events. During the war, the image of the strong woman as seen in posters by Ivanov and Burova and Toidze's "The Motherland Calls", with its female allegorical figure, were complemented by others that showed women as weak or suffering. A poster by Ivanov depicted a grateful young woman hugging a smiling soldier, while another by Ivanov and Burova portrayed an anguished girl behind a barbed wire fence waiting to be shot by a Nazi gunman.

During the 193os, Socialist Realist paintings had for the most part replaced avant-garde visual techniques such as photomontage, and the prevalence of Socialist Realism persisted in World War II propaganda posters, except for those of the satirists. Among several exceptions was El Lissitzky's "Produce More Tanks", done with the assistance of Nikolai Troshin, and published by Iskusstvo. It employed photomontage to show a male and female worker along with photographs of a bomber, a tank, and a factory interior. Not only was the photomontage an exception to the prevailing graphic techniques of Soviet propaganda posters, but it also conjoined more images than was typical in such posters (Plate 88).

## Japan

In September 1940, Japan signed a Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy, thus allocating to it a sphere of influence in Greater East Asia and leaving Germany and Italy to establish a New Order in Europe. Consequently, Japanese propaganda strongly promoted the ambition to create a Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. Propagandists had also begun to demonize America and Britain in the late 193os and continued after Japan bombed Pearl Harbor in December 1941. Such demonizing propaganda included the Australian and New Zealand military forces, which the Japanese were also fighting in the Pacific theater. Japan was additionally engaged in a propaganda war with China, which it had attacked in 1937, and the Japanese subsequently experienced a strong resistance movement from

Chinese propagandists who relied heavily on cartoons to rally support against their occupiers.

In 1936, the Home Ministry created an Information and Propaganda Committee, which issued official press statements and worked on censorship issues. The following year the committee was upgraded to a department and with its new power it began applying censorship guidelines to all Japanese media. In 194o the department became the Cabinet Information Bureau, which consolidated separate propaganda departments from the army, navy, and Foreign Ministry, giving it total control over all news, advertising, and public events. This bureau dealt only with civilian affairs, leaving war bulletins to the press departments of the army and navy. Due to paper shortages, the government suppressed many magazines and newspapers, leaving only a few survivors by the end of the war.

Most visual propaganda was produced outside the Home Ministry. In 1938 an exhibition of commercial art from Japan, Germany, and Italy introduced new visual styles from abroad and in 1940 the Cabinet Information Bureau began to work with a civilian group, the Hodo Gijutsu Kenkyukai (Society for the Study of Media Technology), known also by its abbreviated name, Hoken. Its members included some of Japan's leading art directors and graphic designers—Yamana Ayao; Arai Seiichiro (1907-d.o.d. unconfirmed), an art director for the Morinaga confectionary company; Tada Hokuu (1889-1948); and Kiichi Akabane (191o–d.o.d. unconfirmed), a finalist in the poster competition for the 194o Japanese summer Olympic Games, which were ultimately canceled. Together, they and their colleagues produced posters and exhibition panels for different ministries and organizations. Among the group's themes were civilian activities such as the conservation of electricity and the encouragement of calisthenics. A strong theme was the warnings against careless talk, which was expressed in a particularly cogent poster that depicted only a pair of lips and a brief text: “Prevent Espionage”.

Advertising agencies were also a primary source of war posters, with many commissioned by the Imperial Rule Assistance Association. Themes included encouraging civil defense, promoting bond drives, boosting war production, and recruiting young men for military service. Styles and techniques varied from realistic painting to modern conceptual graphics. Airbrush use was prevalent in a number of posters, and photography was also occasionally adopted. The Japanese characters that conveyed the texts were frequently bold and blocky, reflecting the influence of the Russian Constructivists that was first seen in Japanese avantgarde graphics of the 192os and 1930s.

Like Germany and to a lesser extent the United States, Japan was creating propaganda for multiple audiences: citizens at home; people abroad; the former European colonies and its own colonies that were being brought under the umbrella of the Co-Prosperity Sphere; and enemy combatants.

Photojournalism was a strong element of propaganda directed to home audiences and to those abroad. In February 1938 the Cabinet Information Bureau began to publish a photographic propaganda magazine, Shashin shuho (Pictorial Weekly). Its editorial policy mixed a glorification of the armed forces with lifestyle stories ranging from coverage of a swim team to a photo essay on the men who worked on a fishing trawler. As it was an official publication that was circulated by neighborhood associations, it reached a wide audience. Its photographers included the best documentarians of the 193os such as Domon Ken and Kimura Ihee, whose photographs graced the covers and contributed to the content of the magazine. Domon and Kimura had previously worked for Nippon, the pictorial magazine that was founded in 1934 (see Chapter 36). Though Life magazine, which had begun publication only a short time after that, was surely a model for Shashin shuho, it is more than likely that the propagandistic tone of the photo essays derived from other publications such as USSR in Construction. Shashin shuho was an important vehicle of domestic propaganda for the Cabinet Information Bureau, which continued