to publish it until July 1945, just a month before the United States dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima.

The influence of the new Japanese documentary photography of the 193os was also evident in another pictorial magazine, Front, a large-format publication that began in 1942, just after the Pacific War started. Front was edited and published by Tohosha (Far East Company), a creative group of civilians that the Intelligence Bureau of the Army General Staff Office brought together a year earlier. Like USSR in Construction, Front's most obvious predecessor, the magazine's purpose was to present Japan as a nation that was militarily powerful as well as socially cohesive. Each issue was dedicated to a separate theme such as the army, the navy, or parachuting, which its writers and photographers explored in depth.

Initially published in 15 languages, Front was directed to Japan's enemies and to the colonies that the nation sought to incorporate in the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. Chairman of the Tohosha board was Okada Sozo (1903–1983), who was to found the documentary film company Tokyo Cinema in the 195os. Sozo brought in the literary critic Hayashi Tatsuo (1896–1984) along with Hara Hiromu as the graphic designer and Kimura Ihee as head of the photography department. Front emulated USSR in Construction in numerous ways. A number of its themes derived directly from its Soviet predecessor, as did its tabloid size and use of multicolor rotogravure printing. Photomontage was widely adopted, as was a style of photo essay in which individual photographs were combined as elements of larger thematic compositions. Besides Kimura, Front employed other documentary photographers including Hamaya Hiroshi (1915–1999), Hayashi Shigeo (1918–2002), Kikuchi Shunkichi (1916–1990), Sonobe Kiyoshi (1921–1996), and Hayashi Shigeru (1918–1990).

Cartoons also played a role in Japanese propaganda. By the time World War II began, Japan already had a long history of cartoon magazines, which started with the British-influenced Japan Punch in 1862. In

November 194o, the New Cartoonists Association, a group that supported the New Order, began to publish Manga, a monthly magazine of cartoons, comic strips, and articles. It had the support of the Government Information Bureau and by mid-1941 had also received the imprimatur of the Propaganda Division of the Imperial Rule Assistance Association. Manga's editor was the cartoonist Kondo Hidezo (19o8–1979), who had previously published his cartoons in Tokyo Puck and the Yomiuri Shimbun. For Manga, Kondo drew most of the covers and many of the two-page color spreads. Cartoons in the magazine attacked and ridiculed the enemy, especially enemy political leaders, Roosevelt, Churchill, and Chiang Kai-shek. As the war progressed, and particularly as Japan began to experience the force of enemy attacks, these leaders were portrayed in progressively demonized images, sometimes even as animals with human heads. Cartoonists also created some of the propaganda leaflets that the Japanese dropped on enemy soldiers, especially the Australians, whom they taunted with drawings of British and American soldiers making time with their women while they were at the front.

## China

Cartoons were additionally used as a weapon against the Japanese. Provoked by Japan's invasion of their country, Chinese cartoonists declared "cartoon warfare" (manhua zhan), a term coined by the cartoonist Wang Dunqing (1899–1990), a key figure in the early Chinese cartoon movement. In July 1937, a group of cartoonists formed the National Salvation Cartoon Association, which created a propaganda team, the Cartoon Propaganda Corps, led by Ye Qianyu (1907–1995), author of the famous Shanghai comic strip, Mr. Wang. As they moved from town to town, the eight members of the Propaganda Corps conceived their mission as encouraging all citizens to resist the Japanese as well as raising the morale of Chinese soldiers at the front. They created cartoon street shows, recording Japanese brutality in cartoons they painted on huge white pieces