Inter-American Affairs, the exhibition featured entries by artists and graphic designers from both the United States and Latin America.

MoMA also presented two thematic propaganda exhibits——Road to Victory and Airways to Peace— which represented the most advanced techniques of exhibit design to date. Both were designed by Herbert Bayer, who had done MoMA's important Bauhaus exhibit in 1938. Road to Victory, mounted in 1942, was curated by the photographer Edward Steichen with texts by the poet Carł Sandburg. It was a paean to America and its power to fight against fascism. Bayer created a pathway through the display of large photos that moved the viewer from images of Native Americans through scenes of farming, then industry, and on to a large blow-up of the bombing of Pearl Harbor. It concluded with sizeable photographs of American troops in action interspersed with scenes that depicted America's hopes for the future. The designer created dramatic lighting and arranged the photographs at different scales and angles to enhance their impact on the viewer.

A year later, Bayer designed Airways to Peace, which Monroe Wheeler of the museum's staff organized. For this exhibit he devised an immersive display that featured a large walk-in globe to house the maps, globes, charts, and other paraphernalia that told the story of how air travel had changed the world for both good and the ills of war. Besides the propaganda exhibits at MoMA, there were also large exhibits with photomurals, dioramas, and innovative display techniques in the Rockefeller Center that the Office of War Information organized on such themes as This is Our War and The Nature of the Enemy

## Mexico

The United States was spending considerable funds through its Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs in the State Department to foster opposition to the Axis powers in Latin America. One aspect of the U.S. message, however, was that the Latin American countries and the United States shared not only a hatred of fascism but also a favorable view of democracy as it was practiced in the United States. The pro-Americanism that the State Department encouraged was not part of the anti-fascist efforts of radical Latin American artists such as the members of Mexico's Taller de Gráfica Popular. While these artists opposed the Nazis, many were Communists. Influenced by the Mexican mural painters of the 192os, their anti-fascist imagery was graphic and visceral, akin to the posters of the Russian Revolution or the radical political graphics of John Heartfield.

Members of the Taller de Gráfica Popular did illustrations for the anti-fascist press, created backdrops for rallies, produced posters, and organized exhibitions against fascism. Collaborating with the Liga Pro-Cultura Alemana, a group of fiercely anti-fascist German expatriates, they created 18 large lithographed posters to advertise a series of anti-fascist lectures in 1938 (Fig. 37.32). Posters by Leopoldo Méndez, Pablo O'Higgins, Alfredo Zalce, and others conveyed tough graphic images to illustrate the horror of Nazism. O'Higgins, for example, depicted a man chained to a Nazi swastika, paraphrasing an earlier photomontage of John Heartfield's, while Leopoldo Méndez showed a figure on another poster with a megaphone for a head holding a Molotov cocktail and blaring Nazi propaganda across Mexico. The Taller artists also produced posters in support of the Red Army, and at the war's end, Ángel Bracho designed one entitled Victoria (Victory), whose dominant icon was a large flag with a red star, waving above the crumbling symbols of fascism.

Links to the German émigrés were also fostered by Hannes Meyer, the left-wing architect and former Bauhaus director who had come to Mexico in 1939. Meyer had begun to work with an exile organization, Alemania Libre (Free Germany), which had a small press, El Libro Libre (The Free Book), that he used to bring out a remarkable publication, El Libro Negro del Terror Nazi en Europa (The Black Book of Nazi