## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

Books on different subjects were sources of information for this chapter. Considerable literature on World War II weapons exists. The Encyclopedia of Weapons of World War I edited by Chris Bishop was indispensible as it provided separate entries for several hundred weapons of all types that Allied and Axis forces used. On warfare, Robert Citino, Armored Forces: History and Sourcebook and The Encyclopedia of Twentieth Century Warfare edited by Dr. Noble Frankland were helpful.

Edward R. Zilbert, Albert Speer and the Nazi Ministry of Arms: Economic Institutions and Industrial Production in the German War Economy is a thorough account of how weapons production was organized in Germany. For material on how the United States organized for wartime manufacturing see the following: Paul A. Koistinen, Arsenal of World War II: The Political Economy of American Warfare, 1940-1945 and The Military-industrial Complex: A Historical Perspective; Gerald D. Nash, World War II and the West: Reshaping the Economy; Donald M. Nelson, Arsenal of Democracy: The Story of American War Production; and R. Elberton Smith, The Army and Economic Mobilization. Three books that discuss the cooperation of American businesses with Germany are Edwin Black, IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance between Nazi Germany and America's Most Powerful Corporation; Henry Ashby Turner Jr., General Motors and the Nazis: The Struggle for Control of Opel, Europe's Biggest Carmaker, and Mira Wilkins and Frank Ernest Hill, American Business Abroad: Ford on Six Continents. Arthur Pulos, The American Design Adventure, 1940-1975 describes the contributions of American industrial designers to the war effort as do Pat Kirkham, Charles and Ray Eames: Designers of the Twentieth Century and monographs on Henry Dreyfuss and Brooks Stevens.

Books on the history of computers, control engineering, ergonomics, and operations research include Michael Williams, A History of Computing Technology, 2nd ed.; Paul E. Ceruzzi, Reckoners: The

Prehistory of the Digital Computer, From Relays to the Stored Program Concept, 1935-1945; Stuart Bennett, A History of Control Engineering, 1930-1955; David A Mindell, Between Human and Machine: Feedback, Control, and Computing before Cybernetics; David Meister, The History of Human Factors and Ergonomics; Saul I. Gass and Assad A. Arjang, An Annotated Timeline of Operations Research: An Informal History; and Raúl Rojas and Ulf Hashagen, The First Computers – History and Architectures. Joseph McCloskey's articles on the beginnings of operations research in Great Britain and the United States were invaluable. See "The Beginnings of Operations Research: 1934-1941," Operations Research 35, no. 1 (January–February 1987); "British Operational Research in World War II," Operations Research 35, no. 3 (May-June 1987); and"U.S. Operations Research in World War II," Operations Research 35, no. 6 (November-December 1987). James Phinney Baxter, Scientists Against Time describes the Office of Scientific Research and Development, the agency where much of American weapons research was conducted.

Design for the American home front is covered in Cynthia Lee Henthorn, From Submarines to Suburbs: Selling a Better America, 1939–1959 and to some degree in John Morton Blum's definitive V was for Victory: Politics and American Culture during World War II. British Utility schemes are discussed in Judy Attfield, ed., Utility Reassessed: The Role of Ethics in the Practice of Design; Harriet Dover, Home Front Furniture: British Utility Design, 1941-195I and the exhibition catalog Utility Furniture and Fashion, 1941–1951. The exhibition catalog Charlotte Perriand and Charlotte Benton's article “From Tubular Steel to Bamboo: Charlotte Perriand, the Migrating Chaise-longue and Japan," Journal of Design History I1, no. 1 (1998) describe Charlotte Perriand's wartime activity in Japan.

There is ample literature on World War II propaganda, especially on poster design. Anthony Rhodes' Propaganda: The Art of Persuasion, WWII, edited by Victor Margolin, is a broad survey of the topic. Books about the posters of all nations include