comparable pieces made by Ashanti, Ngombe, and Mangbetu carvers and those from other West and Central African tribes. Legrain also experimented with novel materials, often in unusual contrasts, as can be seen in his armchair veneered in burr maple with a seat, back, and decorative cubes of sharkskin.

Before working for Doucet, Eileen Gray undertook an intensive study of lacquering technique with Sugawara Seizo before Dunand studied with him. During the period that she was involved with the design of luxury furniture, her most extensive commission was for Mme. Suzanne Talbot, owner of a famous salon where expensive women's hats were sold. Rather than design individual pieces as she had for Doucet, Gray designed the entire Talbot apartment as a unified interior, a project that took approximately four years. She filled the entrance hall with lacquer panels, and for the salon, she created a lacquer and tortoise shell Pirogue sofa, known also as a lit-de-bateau or boat bed in which a person could recline.

Without the need to create prototypes for mass production, designers could be as imaginative and lavish as their clients desired. Following the lead of Jacques Doucet and perhaps recognizing the publicity that Mme. Talbot derived from Eileen Gray's dramatic interiors, other fashion designers commissioned furniture and complete interiors from decorative artists. The coutourière Madeleine Vionnet (1876–1975), a pioneer in the design of draped form-conscious clothing, and the milliner Madame Agnès (dates unconfirmed) commissioned numerous furniture pieces from Jean Dunand. Armand-Albert Rateau (1882–1938), a lesser-known but active designer of furniture, interiors, and decorative objects, furnished the apartment of Jeanne Lanvin (1867-1946), the first coutourière to dress men, women, and children. Rateau's workshop included cabinetmakers, carpenters, sculptors, painters, gilders, ironworkers, and other craftspersons. For Lanvin's apartment, he created bronze furniture in a Pompeian style and also designed a spherical perfume bottle for his client. It was imprinted with Paul Iribe's logo depicting Lanvin and her daughter. In addition Rateau designed the interior of Lanvin's fashion house and subsequently became the manager of Lanvin-Décoration, the company's department of interior design.

## The Avant-Garde in France De Stijl

After founding the De Stijl movement in the Netherlands and then spending three years in Germany, where he was the central figure in the German Constructivist movement and an adversary of the Bauhaus in Weimar, Theo van Doesburg moved to Paris in 1923. That year he participated in a show of De Stijl architectural projects, notably for private residences, at the Paris gallery of French art dealer Leonce Rosenberg. Among the models in the exhibition was a House for an Artist, which van Doesburg designed in collaboration with the Dutch architect Cor van Eesteren (1897–1988). The model consisted of intersecting cubic volumes with the exposed surfaces painted in black, white, and the primary colors. In a statement published in the De Stijl journal around the time of the exhibition, van Doesburg and van Eesteren called for objective laws for architecture that were based on fixed principles. It is "not the relationship between things themselves" that is important, they declared, "but the relationship between their qualities." Nothing could have been farther from the celebration of individual creativity that animated the exhibitions of the Society of Artist-Decorators. Van Doesburg and van Eesteren sharply criticized this attitude when they wrote that "[t]he new spirit which already governs almost all modern life is opposed to animal spontaneity (lyricism), to the domination of nature, to complicated hair styles and elaborate cooking." No wonder that their 1923 exhibition was ignored by many French critics and architects, although even those publications which stated that French architects could learn something from De Stijl still criticized the exhibition's drawings and models for being too reductive, too rectilinear, and