airplane designer and manufacturer who had shifted to automobile design after the war. Like other wartime manufacturers looking for peacetime projects, Voisin was interested in entering the French housing market with mass-produced dwellings. Thus, Le Corbusier's pavilion, a unit made with standardized elements, represented Voisin's interests as did the more developed version of Le Corbusier's Ville Contemporaine plan of 1922, the Plan Voisin of Paris, which was also on display in the pavilion.

Le Corbusier's idea of furniture design was close to the theory of types that Hermann Muthesius espoused in the Werkbund debates of 1914. He furnished his pavilion with "object-types," which he thought represented ideal furniture forms. These included bentwood chairs from Vienna, and English-style club chairs. The walls were hung with his own Purist paintings and paintings by Fernand Léger.

The Pavilion de l'Esprit Nouveau gained Le Corbusier his first public recognition and led to important commissions in the next few years: the workers' housing project at Pessac near Bordeaux, the Villa Stein in Garches, and the Villa Savoye outside Paris. While his pavilion gained far less attention at the time than Patout's and Ruhlmann's Hôtel du Collectioneur, in the long run it had a far greater impact on other designers as interest in and support for the luxury market in furnishings and interiors began to decline, particularly after the Great Depression of 1929.

## Dada

After the poet Guillaume Apollinaire died in the influenza epidemic of 1918, he was succeeded by a group of young writers—André Breton, Paul Éluard, Phillipe Soupault, and Louis Aragon among them—who wanted to continue his experiments with literature. They had followed the Dada activities of Marcel Duchamp, Man Ray, and Francis Picabia in New York, and Tristan Tzara in Zurich. By 192o, all these artists were welcomed in Paris, where Picabia continued to publish his avantgarde newspaper 391 and Tzara launched a program of Dada publications. Under Tzara's direction, two new journals came out: Bulletin Dada and Dadaphone. Picabia designed several witty covers for Littérature, the magazine edited by Aragon, Breton, and Soupault. For the cover of Littérature 7 he made a pun on the title, breaking it up into Lits et Ratures (Beds and Failures), a joke he supported with drawings of one pair each of men's and women's shoe soles that suggested a man lying on top of a woman in bed.

But Dada in Paris had no political program and the best it could do was attempt to shock its audience with audacious language and provocative antics. By 1922, Breton, who had emerged as the strong force in the literary group that succeeded Apollinaire, was already speaking of the end of Dada. Tzara tried to save the movement with the establishment of a new journal, Le Coeur à Barbe (The Bearded Heart), whose only issue appeared in April 1922. The cover design was playful rather than political (Fig. 22.06). Tzara chose 19th-century Egyptian letters for the title and combined them in a witty way with a variety of printer's cuts that had no particular meaning. When he organized an Evening of the Bearded Heart the following year, the poster the Russian Ilia Zdanevich (1894–1975) adopted all the Dada tricks, notably a mix of type sizes and fonts, a clever use of printers’ cuts, and a cacophonous sequence of words. However, the layout had no connection with the content, signifying only an anarchic relation to the conventions of print rather than a truly subversive relation to language itself. As it turned out, the event, which included a performance ofTzara's play, Coeur à Gaz, was disrupted by several fist fights and a physical attack on Tzara by Paul Éluard, thus effectively ending any further French interest in Dada. The following year, Breton wrote the "First Surrealist Manifesto", thereby inaugurating a new avant-garde movement with a much greater stake in exploring the psychological and political meaning of human action.