a dozen large glass cascades, which were lit from within, thus continuing the use of indirect lighting that had originated with the design of the Île de France.

The amount of money the government spent on the Normandie provoked considerable controversy but resulted in the most lavish sailing vessel ever created. Though trends in the future design of passenger ships would eventually lead towards more democratic than aristocratic layouts and interiors, the Normandie set a high standard for the design of a ship's interior, one against which all future designs would have to be measured. After the fall of France in 1940, the United States Navy seized the ship when it was docked in New York harbor and began to convert it into a troop carrier. During the conversion, a fire started and neither the navy personnel nor the contractors knew how to turn on the fire extinguishing system. Water pouring onto the ship from fireboats caused it to turn over and when it was finally set upright the cost of restoration was deemed too great. In 1946 the Compagnie Générale Transatlantique decided to scrap the Normandie.

## The Paris Exhibition of 1937

When planning for the 1937 exhibition began in 1929, few could envision that by the time of its inauguration, Europe would be edging towards another world war. The French government put on a brilliant display of national accomplishments in an array of pavilions that ranged from the style moderne to monumental classicism. Due to the Depression, the government played a major financial role in the exhibition in contrast to the predominantly private funds that supported the exhibition of 1925. Both exhibitions sought to promote France's superiority in the creation of luxury goods and the 1937 exhibition continued this aim with a multitude of pavilions dedicated to materials such as wood and metal as well as to furniture, ceramics, aeronautics, and railroads. There was even a pavilion devoted to fashion, jewelry, and perfumes. The Society of Artist-Decorators had its own building, where it continued its traditional display of full-scale specialty rooms for the wealthy. For the first time, the Union des Artistes Modernes (UAM) had its own building, but the contents, primarily separate displays by the Union's members, were hardly innovative. Notably absent was a pavilion to recognize the design accomplishments of French industry. Despite the Salon des Arts Ménager's successful promotion of industrial products for the home, the idea of industrial design had still not entered French consciousness, consequently it did not exist as the raison d’être for a separate pavilion devoted to industrial products.

The exhibition had an unusual number of foreign pavilions, more than 4o. Of these, the Russian and German ones were the most striking and faced each other ominously across the exhibition grounds. The Russian Pavilion, designed by the architect Boris Iofan (1891–1976), was topped by Vera Mukhina's gigantic sculpture, "Worker and Collective Farm Girl," while the German pavilion, created by Hitler's chief architect, Albert Speer, conveyed the Nazi's ideals through its towering Neo-Classical facade topped by an eagle perched on a swastika. This symbolic confrontation of powerful ideologies portended badly for Europe's immediate future even though the French government's ambitious building program and optimistic displays would have led one to believe otherwise. In fact, Germany invaded Czechoslovakia in March 1939, and by September, World War II had begun.

## Graphic Design

## Magazines and advertising

After World War I, the Gazette du Bon Ton, Jardin des Modes, and other leading pre-war fashion magazines in Paris continued as major sources for established illustrators like George Barbier (1882-1932), George Lepape (1887-1971), André Marty (1886–1956), and Charles Martin (1884-1934). New magazines like Art, Goût, Beauté (Art, Taste, Beauty), known for its handcolored illustrations, and La Femme Chic (The Chic Woman) also provided sources for these illustrators. The influence of Cubism on illustration and commercial art spread after the war. It is evident in the drawings of Martin, which make obvious reference to paintings by Picasso and Modigliani. The mixture of thin curves and angular lines in Martin's illustrations and the swaths of color that suggest volumes contribute to the lightness of feeling that resonated with the French post-war sensibility. His style is evident in the drawings that Lucien Vogel commissioned for a deluxe edition of composer Eric Satie's piano compositions, Sports et Divertissements (Sports and Diversions), which was published in 1923 (Plate 13).

Lucien Vogel's Gazette du Bon Ton ceased publication in 1925 after the American publisher Condé Nast acquired it and merged it with his own fashion magazine, Vogue. Condé Nast introduced a French edition of Vogue in 192o and some of the Gazette's illustrators began to draw for it. George Lepape had already been contributing to Vogue's New York and London editions and he then continued to draw covers for the French version until 1939. His style gradually changed to reflect the more spare Cubist aesthetic of the 192os and his subjects became the tall slim figures sporting short hair styles and chic garments that were created by a new breed of French designers, all women, including Coco Chanel, Jeanne Lanvin, and Madeleine Vionnet. Other illustrators who specialized in depicting the suave men and stylish women of the new smart set were Leon Benigni (1892-1948), Edouard Halouze (1900-d.o.d. unconfirmed), Guy Arnoux (1886–1951), and the Spaniard Edouard Garcia Benito (1891–1981).

After 1925, photography gradually began to replace fashion illustration, although fashion editors at Vogue and other magazines continued to use illustrators such as Erté (1892-1990), Christian Bérard (1902– 1949), René Bouét-Willaumez (1900-1979), Drian (1885–1961), and René Bouché (1906–1963) to highlight the creations of famous couturiers. The leading fashion photographers included Man Ray (189o-1976), a former collaborator with Marcel Duchamp and the French Dadaists, Horst P. Horst (1906-1999), and George Hoyningen-Heune (1900-1968). The trend towards photography could also be seen in advertising, particularly by the beginning of the 193os. However, there were no polemical advocates to replace advertising illustration with photography as there were in Germany, where the use of photographs in all forms of commercial art became a fundamental tenet of the New Typography.

The illustrated magazines in Germany--the Berliner Illustrirte Zeitung, the Münchner Illustrierte Zeitung, and others—had become examples of new ways to view the world and they stimulated the creation of comparable publications elsewhere. In 1928, Lucien Vogel founded Vu, a weekly news magazine that relied almost exclusively on photographs and was the first magazine of its kind in France (Fig. 22.15).

By the late 192os, a number of photographers had begun to do extended feature reportages for Vu as well as other magazines, along with creating formally sophisticated advertising spreads. René Zuber (1902-1979) was initially intrigued with the German photographer Albert Renger-Patszch's sharply outlined pictures of objects lined up in series, but in the 193os he formed a partnership with Pierre Boucher (1908–2000) and began to do more reportage. Boucher had a particular interest in the Constructivist photographs of Alexander Rodchenko and the "new vision" of Bauhaus instructor László Moholy-Nagy. He produced photographic covers for the graphic design magazine Arts et Métiers Graphique and also published in Vu.

Boucher put great store in photographic manipulation and took a particular interest in several experimental techniques; photomontage, solarization, and superimposing one image on another. He was much in demand for advertising photographs and he applied his experimental techniques to these as well as to his personal work. Like Boucher, François Kollar (1904-1979) specialized in commercial and industrial photography, counting among his clients manufacturers of luxury items like the glassware firm Christophle, the manufacturer of leather goods Hermès, and the perfume maker Coty. He did fashion photography