approach to graphic communication. As a German critic wrote of Tolmer's book in Gebrauchsgraphik, "Some of his lay-outs are so playful or so crazy that they do not appeal to the German taste."

However, it was playfulness and a relation to modern art that characterized the best French graphic design in the 192os and 193os. Among its leading practitioners were two émigrés, Dr. Mehemed Fehmy Agha (1896-1978), a Turk born in the Ukraine, and Alexey Brodovitch (1898–1971), a Russian refugee from the Bolshevik Revolution. Agha, a talented cartoonist and illustrator who briefly attended art school in Kiev, came to Paris to study Oriental languages, but after receiving his diploma, he ended up working for the Dorland Agency, a large international advertising firm. There he helped to modernize the advertising section of Vogue's French edition by combining the elegant style of France's fashion illustrators with the new decorative modernity of French typography. His work impressed Condé Nast, the publisher of Vogue, who hired him in 1928 to move to Berlin as art director of Vogue's German edition, following which he went to work for Condé Nast in New York.

After winning a poster contest for an artist's ball in 1924, Alexey Brodovitch earned five medals for the design of textiles, silver, china, and jewelry at the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs. With this recognition, he received numerous commissions, including posters for the French department stores Le Printemps and Bon Marché, and an opportunity to create decorative wall panels for a seafood restaurant, Prunier. In 1928, Brodovitch was hired by the Parisian department store Aux Trois Quartiers to work in its new design studio, which was named Athélia. The work of the studio ranged from interior design and exhibitions to publicity and advertising. Brodovitch's projects included the design and illustration of catalogs and advertisements for the store's luxury men's boutique, Madélios, and the decoration of the main store's temporary facade, which was widely publicized in European design magazines.

Like Cassandre, whose posters he admired,

Brodovitch was influenced by Cubism and the Purist paintings of Le Corbusier and Ozenfant. As well, he was taken with Surrealism whose emphasis on ambiguous subject matter would play a large role in the work he did later in his career. His cover for the Madélios catalog of 1928 brought together the Cubist use of fragments, in this case the classical facade of the Church of the Madeleine near where the Madélios store was located, with expressive tree branches in the background, and a geometric division of the surface that approximates the Golden Section. To create an overall visual structure, Brodovitch integrated the lines of the letters with other lines in the composition that frame the church as well as additional text. Like Cassandre, he used an airbrush to create subtle transitions of tone, which infused a dreamy quality into an otherwise geometric design. The combination of geometry with a more vague sense of mood was characteristic of Brodovitch's work for Aux Trois Quartiers and exemplifies a particularly French approach to advertising and graphic design during the interwar years.

## Bibliography

## Bibliographic essay

General histories of modern design with material about France in this period are numerous. They include History of Industrial Design, 1919-1990: The Domain of Design; Wendy Kaplan, ed., Designing Modernity: The Arts of Reform and Persuasion, 1885–1945; Paul Greenhalgh, ed., Modernism in Design; Giulia Veronesi, Style and Design, 1919–1929; Klaus-Jürgen Sembach, Gabriele Leuthäuser, and Peter Gössel, Twentieth-Century Furniture Design; and the conference proceedings edited by Victor Margolin, Anty Pansera, and Frederick Wildhagen, Tradizione e Modernismo: Design 1918-1940/Tradition and Modernism: Design between the Wars. There are also books that specialize in decorative art of the period and Art Deco. Among them are two by Martin Battersby, The Decorative Twenties and The Decorative Thirties; Yvonne Brunhammer, The Nineteen Twenties