# Chapter 23: Great Britain 1918-1939

## Introduction

The British populace was ambivalent about the machine culture that some on the continent and in America espoused. They were equally skeptical of France's emphasis on luxury goods, which the French produced in their own version of a modern style. Politically, Britain was less inclined to build relations with other European nations than to strengthen the ties within its own empire. Manufacturers could foster a notion of Englishness because they perceived it to be a marketable value, not only at home but among the nation's colonies, protectorates, and commonwealth partners as well.

Englishness as a design idea took two forms. First was a reliance on icons of the English past, particularly period styles in furniture and architecture. Much of the period furniture was produced cheaply with poor materials and questionable workmanship. A popular style in the 192os was mock Tudor, although furnishings in the Georgian and Queen Anne styles were also sought after. Tudor was adopted for domestic architecture as well as for teashops that conveyed an atmosphere of "Ye Olde England." The most blatant example of mock-Tudor architecture was the new building for Liberty's, the department store that popularized decorative objects connected to the Aesthetic and Arts and Crafts movements.

The second notion of Englishness, which proved more fruitful as a source of new designs, was the Design and Industry Association's adoption of Arts and Crafts values. These they epitomized in the phrase "Fitness for purpose." Since it's founding in 1915, the DIA had sought to apply traditional values of craftsmanship and truth to materials to modern design practice. The organization opposed the cheap reproductions of period design, espousing instead quality workmanship and simpler forms. The DIA respected traditional values of design but not historic styles. The result was a brand of modernism that defended the adaptation of craft techniques to serial production but stopped short of turning production over to a machine. Active and influential in the 192os and early 193os, the DIA was involved in many efforts to promote good design. These ranged from publications and exhibitions to support for government committees. DIA influence started to wane in the 193os, however, as interest in machinemade goods began to spread. Though not always explicit, DIA values predominated among British design reformers, whether they were in government or the private sector.

In 192o, the Federation of British Industries formed an Industrial Art Committee with a vague mandate to consider the question of industrial design, while the government supported the establishment of the British Institute of Industrial Art (BIIA) the same year. The BILA's mandate was twofold: to raise the standards of British industrial design and to simultaneously elevate the level of public taste. To that end, it opened an exhibition gallery in London, where it displayed examples of well-designed products, although it tended to support a handicraft-inspired aesthetic as promoted by the DIA. That same year the DIA organized its own Exhibition of Household Things and issued a report that discussed the necessary equipment for a labor-saving home. Here the organization was trying to serve as a broker between consumers and manufacturers, arguing for standardized products that could be sold at lower prices. Neither the exhibitions of the British Institute of Industrial Art nor the activities of the Design and Industry Association significantly improved consumer taste or induced manufacturers to hire designers. The British public was much more