inclined towards traditional styles and production methods as well as low prices.

## The British Empire Exhibition and the Empire Marketing Board

Britain's first major post-war exhibition, which opened at Wembley in north London in 1924 and closed the next year, celebrated the commercial activity and ambition of its empire. Its intent was to make the public aware of what was being produced in the colonies and dominions, thereby encouraging an expansion of trade within the empire itself. Three main areas were dedicated respectively to the exhibits of the various British ministries, including the Department of Overseas Trade; the industrial and agricultural products of the empire, which were displayed in an array of exotic pavilions; and lastly the fruits of British industry, engineering, and art. Frank Pick (1878–1941), then serving as publicity officer for the London Underground, consulted on the graphics. J. C. Herrick (dates unconfirmed) drew the crest for the exhibition, a proud lion that represented the empire. Two artists who created posters were R. T. Cooper (dates unconfirmed) and Gerald Spencer Pryse $\left( \mathrm { I } 8 8 0 \mathrm { - } \mathrm { I } 9 5 6 \right)$ , the latter an artist who had also designed posters for the British government during World War I and had worked for the London Underground as well. For the exhibition poster series entitled “Scenes of Empire," Pryse completed a group of paintings that were combined with text to show industrious natives engaged in productive activity. Their intention, like the larger aim of the exhibition, was to promote opportunities for economic exchange within the empire (Plate 16).

Goods from the colonies were presented in two forms: as raw materials that British manufacturers could purchase and as handicrafts that could be sold abroad or that might inspire designs in the more developed parts of the empire. Design historian Jonathan Woodham has examined the particular case of Britain's West African colonies—Nigeria, the Gold Coast, and Sierra Leone—which exhibited a great variety of craft items at Wembley. The colonies also organized workshops manned by African craftsmen and women—known as "industrial natives"—who demonstrated techniques for producing a variety of arts and crafts.

What may have distinguished these workshops from more exotic displays of native life at past exhibitions was the Wembley exhibition's emphasis on economic development and trade. This would have given the workshops a meaning as sites of production rather than as showcases of native customs. In the Nigerian pavilion, one could see furniture for a bank office, a dining room, and a bedroom, all designed by a London firm, Messrs. Howard & Sons, and made of African woods—mahogany, teak, opepe, and walnut.

The Empire Exhibition, though widely attended, exposed a large gap in the British public's knowledge about the colonies. It was important to remedy this so that consumers would purchase more colonial goods and thereby help foster colonial trade. To this end, the Dominions Office esablished the Empire Marketing Board (EMB), which existed between 1926 and 1933. The EMB's campaign to promote the consumption of food, raw materials, and manufactured goods from the colonies made use of diverse media—newspaper advertisements, shop window display materials, radio broadcasts, exhibitions, films, lectures, and large numbers of posters that were designed for special outdoor display frames or hoardings. The overall media campaign was directed by EMB Secretary Stephen Tallents (1884-1958), who some consider to be the founder of public relations in Great Britain. Besides supervising the extensive poster campaign that resulted in more than 6oo posters, which were displayed on 2,00o hoardings throughout Britain, Tallents founded the EMB Film Unit, headed by John Grierson, which created a new type of documentary film to promote civic aims.

Consultants to the EMB included Sir William Crawford (1840-1922), founder of one of Britain's leading advertising agencies, who chaired the Publicity