(Plate 17). After the map was successfully introduced to the public in 1933, Beck continued to suggest changes for subsequent versions. Some were accepted, while others made changes to the map as well. In 1938, Beck produced a comprehensive diagram of the entire London Transport system but it was never published because the Transport Board believed that it contained too much information.

Frank Pick's credo that art was an essential component of civilized life paralleled the earlier beliefs of William Morris, whose influence on Pick was confirmed by the extensive extracts from Morris's writings that he copied in his diary. Similarly, Pick's abiding concern with the quality of passenger amenities and services in London's transport system not only exemplified the DIA's principles in the best sense but also established a precedent for the design of public services that has hardly been matched since.

## The Beginnings of British Modernism

Unlike Germany or Scandinavia, modern design in Britain did not become a pervasive force. On the continent, socialist or progressive governments saw in modernism an exemplification of democratic social values. By contrast, this democratic modernist approach was to be distinguished from the more elite modernism that one could see at the Paris 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs. Though both modernisms were marginally adopted in Britain, tradition remained a more powerful presence in the national consciousness.

Just over a year after the Paris exhibition, Ambrose Heal (1872-1959), whose furniture company, Heal & Sons, had early on specialized in sturdy yeoman furnishings derived from Arts and Crafts ideals, introduced a range of modern furniture in Macassar ebony for middle-class consumers. It was influenced by the luxury style of Jacques Émile Ruhlmann but the difference was that J. F. Johnson (dates unconfirmed), head of Heal's cabinet department, transformed the subtle elegance of Ruhlmann's designs into heavier pieces that were more in keeping with British taste.

More faithful interpretations of French moderne were introduced to Britain in 1928 by Waring & Gillow, a London furniture manufacturer that specialized in expensive furnishings for ships, hotels, embassies, and private individuals. That year, Serge Chermayeff (1900— 1996), a Russian who came to England as a boy and worked previously for a British decorating firm, joined the company as head of its newly established Modern Art Studio. Together with Paul Follot (1877–1941), the French decorator who ran Waring & Gillow's Paris branch while also heading the furniture and decorative arts workshop at the Bon Marché department store, Chermayeff organized a huge Exhibition of Modern Design in 1928 at Waring & Gillow's London showrooms. Consisting of 68 rooms, the exhibition gave the British public a broad introduction to the French modern style. Among the displays was a ten-room suite of French furniture that Follot coordinated and another ten rooms with furnishings designed in Waring & Gillow's Modern Art Studio under Chermayeff. Unlike previous exhibitions of the Arts and Crafts Society, the Waring & Gillow display made no attempt to please a populist audience, featuring instead furnishings that emulated the luxurious styles of the Paris ateliers.

Of greater importance to the development of modern furniture in Britain were two other sources: the spare aesthetic of Scandinavia's furniture designers, particularly as it became known in Britain after the modernist Stockholm Exhibition of 193o; and the tubular steel furniture that was introduced to the German public at the Weissenhof Exhibition of 1927 in Stuttgart. Chermayeff, who left Waring & Gillow after a year to start his own architectural firm, was the first designer in Britain to create tubular steel furniture for domestic use.

Originally, the British public believed steel furniture to be appropriate only for hospitals or offices. A leading periodical of furniture design referred to it in 1929 as "too austere for the British public" and derided it in 193o as "that gas pipe stuff." The same year, Chermayeff and Paul Follot designed a