tubular steel chair and table that Waring & Gillow manufactured, although this furniture was directed to an upscale clientele rather than the broader market at which Thonet had aimed its own tubular steel pieces in Germany and elsewhere on the continent. However, tubular steel furniture gained a wider appeal in Britain when Thonet opened a London showroom in 1929. Shortly thereafter architect Robert Cromie (dates unconfirmed), known for his Art Deco cinema designs, furnished the restaurant of the Capitol Cinema in London with Thonet furniture and several tubular pieces appeared in the lobby of the Strand Hotel.

Around the same time, several British manufacturers began to develop a line of metal furniture for domestic consumption. The most successful was Practical Equipment Ltd, better known by its acronym P.E.L. Initially the firm hired Oliver Percy Bernard (1881– 1939), a theater set designer, to propose chair designs and several were put into production during Bernard's affiliation with P.E.L. from 1931 to 1933. Initially P.E.L. sought to combine the comfort of a traditional armchair with spare steel construction. For his SP4B armchair, Bernard produced a fully upholstered seat in green rexine——a synthetic plastic material—and supported it on a tubular steel frame. Better known, however, was a more elegant chair he designed, which included a black upholstered seat and back support that refined an earlier model by the Luckhardt brothers in Germany.

P.E.L.'s most important early commission was from the British Broadcasting Corporation for its new headquarters building, Broadcasting House. Designed by George Val Myer (1883–1959), the building was completed in 1932. The BBC hired Raymond McGrath (1903-1977), a young Australian architect who had emigrated to Britain, as its "decoration consultant." He was responsible for the complete design of the interior including the equipment for the broadcast studios. To assist him, he brought in Serge Chermayeff and the architect Wells Coates (1895-1958). In 1930, the three had formed the Twentieth Century Group to promote modern architecture and design in Britain.

Their task at the BBC was to furnish the offices, which Val Myer had placed in an outer shell surrounding the studios, and then to design the layout and equipment for the studios themselves. Broadcasting House bought a large number of P.E.L.'s standard stacking chair, the RP6, and then purchased the rights from its designer, the Austrian Bruno Pollock (dates unconfirmed), so they could use it exclusively. Because the BBC decided to use only British or commonwealth goods, P.E.L. faced no competition from abroad and hired McGrath, Chermayeff, and Coates to design additional tubular steel furniture especially for Broadcasting House. It did, however, share the BBC commission with another British manufacturer of tubular steel furniture, Cox & Co.

For the many studios and offices, McGrath, Chermayeff, and Coates designed all the furniture, house telephones, signal lights, microphone stands and signage. All the interior elements had functional forms and a standardized quality. Coates, who had an engineering background, designed a control unit that could coordinate actors in up to ten different studios. He also designed several suspended microphones, one of an aluminum alloy in a swiveling wall fitting. The other, which became the standard microphone for the BBC, was suspended on a counterbalanced arm that allowed the microphone to be moved to any part of the studio. The interior of Broadcasting House—far more adventurous than its exterior—-was an impressive example of modernist design that integrated formal and technical innovations. Although modernism was slow to influence the design of domestic furnishings in Britain, it proved ideal for the BBC, which sought a bold visual style to herald its entry into a new age of broadcast communication.

## The Gorrell Report and its Consequences

Besides commissioning modern furnishings for its offices and studios in London and around the world, the BBC also broadcast a series of radio talks on Design and Modern Life in 1933. The subjects