ranged from furniture and fashion to kitchen design, architecture, and planning. The DIA position, which promoted design quality rather than a particular style, dominated the series. In his summary talk, Frank Pick, then President of the DIA, reiterated the organization's "fitness for purpose" theme, which had become the foundation of subsequent government efforts to promote good design in Britain.

The year before the BBC talks, Britain's Board of Trade released a report on The Production and Exhibition of Good Design and Articles of Everyday Use. Produced by a committee headed by Lord Gorrell and known as the Gorrell Report, the document strongly encouraged the promotion of good design, particularly through increased exhibitions, improvements in art education, and urging manufacturers to use industrial designers. As one result of the report, the Board of Trade established a Council for Art and Industry in 1933. Chaired by Frank Pick, who was accruing considerable power as an advocate for good design, the council membership consisted of industrialists, designers, and critics, although only one was a woman. Though established by a government agency, the Council for Art and Industry received no annual funding, thus it had to request financial support on a project-by-project basis. Unlike the Deutscher Werkbund, which was independent of the German government, the Council for Art and Industry was one of the first design promotion organizations, if not the first, to be appointed by a government body. Through several reports it issued in the 193os, it sought to spread the message that design should be a vital part of Britain's overseas trade policy. It also promoted the value of good design to the domestic consumer, spreading more widely a message that the DIA had been propounding since its founding in 1915.

With an impetus from the Gorrell Report, a group of dedicated promoters organized a large exhibition of British industrial art at London's Dorland Hall in 1933. The focus was on domestic arts and the exhibition was divided among examples of well-designed individual objects and a collection of rooms that were furnished by diverse architects and designers. These ranged from Oliver Hill (1887–1968), who created a display of sheet glass furniture in the French moderne style for the glass manufacturer Pilkington Brothers, to staunch continental modernists like Serge Chermayeff and Wells Coates. Coates's "minimum flat" was an upscale version of the simple flats that had been promoted during the 192os in the Neue Frankfurt and other German housing projects. The extensive exhibition showed off, at least in part, the DIA philosophy of good modern design. Despite acclamations of success by proponents of modern design, however, it did not sufficiently emphasize two concerns that were paramount for the British consumer—tradition and price. Nor were these concerns adequately addressed at a subsequent exhibition, "British Art in Industry," held in London under the auspices of the Royal Academy and the Royal Society of Arts at Burlington House in 1935. Critics claimed that the work on display was exclusive and in some cases ill conceived.

The Dorland Hall Exhibition of 1933 and the Burlington House exhibition two years later spread the gospel of good design to a certain degree but were less successful in attracting large audiences than their more inclusive and commercially-oriented counterparts, the annual British Industries Fair, inaugurated in 1915, and the Ideal Home Exhibition, founded in 19o8 by the Daily Mail. The crowds that attended both of these fairs testified to public interest in new domestic designs, while the failure of the Dorland Hall and Burlington House exhibitions to present unified and coherent displays of good design at affordable prices was indicative that modernism in the democratic continental sense of providing modern products with simple forms and modest prices was still insufficiently understood or appreciated in Britain.

## The Modernist Campaign Continues

The BBC's Broadcasting House was a major success for the modernist camp in Britain, but it was an institutional project that did little to promote an interest in modernism for the domestic home furnishings market. Nonetheless, a small number of architects and critics continued to espouse modernist ideals in selected designs, attracting a loyal following albeit a modest one.

From the triumvirate of McGrath, Coates, and Chermayeff, who completed the BBC interior design so successfully, Raymond McGrath subsequently concentrated on architecture, while Serge Chermayeff and Wells Coates became active in the fields of interiors, furniture, and industrial design, though Chermayeff emigrated to the United States in 194o. Coates's major patron for modern architecture and interior design was Jack Pritchard (1899–1992), who first began to promote modern design as the marketing manager for the Venesta plywood company, where he commissioned an exhibition stand from Le Corbusier, Pierre Jeanneret, and Charlotte Perriand.

In 1933, Pritchard and Wells Coates founded an architectural firm that shortly thereafter became Isokon Ltd. Their aim was to design prototypes for standardized houses but this ambition quickly evolved into the firm's first major project, Lawn Road Flats, a fourstorey block of standardized apartments in reinforced concrete. Besides the building, Coates meticulously created interiors that were designed for efficient living as participants had argued for at the CIAM (International Congress of Modern Architecture) Congress on the existenzminimum" (minimal living) in 1929. The units contained built-in furniture and storage space as well as freestanding modern pieces, some of which Coates designed. They also had modern fittings and appliances for the kitchen and bathroom. Completed in 1934, the flats had been promoted the year before in several rooms that Coates designed for the Dorland Hall Exhibition.

While working on the Lawn Road Flats, Coates was active in two groups that promoted modern architecture and design—MARS and Unit One. MARS, which stood for Modern Architectural Research

Association, became the British branch of CIAM whose congresses Coates and others attended. Unit One was a group of painters, sculptors, and architects who joined together to promote modernism through publications and exhibitions. Among the members, besides Coates, were the painter Ben Nicholson (1894-1982), sculptors Henry Moore (1898-1986) and Barbara Hepworth (1903-1975), the critic Herbert Read (1893-1968), and the artist and designer Paul Nash.

As a furniture designer, Coates produced a tubular steel desk and day bed for P.E.L. Ltd and plywood bookcases for Isokon. His tubular steel designs consisted of plywood volumes or cushions on metal frames, while his bookcases and built-in pieces were comprised of simple rectilinear volumes. None of this furniture broke new ground, although one piece had promise—a mobile desk with a plywood frame and tubular steel supports that could be stored away in a wall unit. However, Coates never refined it to the point where it could be successful in the market.

Following Hitler's rise to power in Germany, Walter Gropius, Marcel Breuer, and László Moholy-Nagy emigrated to Britain. After the Lawn Road Flats, Pritchard, advised by Gropius, focused Isokon on the design and marketing of modern furniture. Gropius became Isokon's Controller of Design and recommended that Breuer be the chief designer. Pritchard also hired Moholy-Nagy to design the odd flyer for the company.

Through his long years of work with Venesta, Pritchard was extremely knowledgeable about plywood and commissioned Breuer to design a cantilevered plywood reclining chair that recalled Alvar Aalto's experimental furniture with cantilevered birch slats. Breuer based his chair on an aluminum model and, after a series of refinements, created an elegant piece of furniture with a plywood frame and padded cushion (Fig. 23.o5). Though he designed other pieces for Isokon including plywood tables, chairs, and stools, the long chair was his most successful project and, despite its limited production and modest sales, remains one of