and design style changed from issue to issue. Widjeveld designed some of the front and back covers himself (Fig. 24.03), though he invited many artists and architects to design covers as well. Most were Dutch, but he also solicited cover designs from foreign architects and designers such as the German Expressionist Herman Finsterlin (1887-1973) and the Russian avant-garde artist and designer El Lissitzky.

Wijdeveld's own design sensibility was rooted in the dense decoration of the Dutch Nieuwe Kunst of the late 19th century. He also drew on the elaborate intricacy of Javanese ornament. Like De Klerk, Wijdeveld favored heavy forms. He constructed his letters from elements in the type case and crowded them together with minimal leading. This approach was also evident in the page layouts and ornaments he designed for all the issues while he was associated with the journal. Though an architect, Wijdeveld was also active as a graphic artist. Besides his work for Wendingen, he handled a range of commissions among which were posters, book covers and bookplates, diplomas, stationery, ornaments, and lettering assignments. His letter designs had a distinct look that came to be known as the "Wendingen style."

## The Hague School

If H. P. Berlage was the architect whose rationalism the Amsterdam School rejected, he was conversely a strong influence on a group of architects and furniture designers who were called by an Amsterdam architect "de Nieuwe Haagse School" (the New Hague School). Some, like Henk Wouda (1885-1946), had trained with Berlage though they rejected the older architect's rigidity. Following his stint in Berlage's office, Wouda went to Munich where he worked for Eduard Pfeiffer (dates unconfirmed), a designer who headed the Pössenbacher Werkstätte, a studio where designers had adopted the style of the Austrian and German Secession. Back in The Hague, Wouda joined Pander, one of Holland's largest interior design firms, in 1917. Pander specialized in expensive projects for which they provided all the work. Besides one-off interior designs for large private homes, businesses, and institutions, Pander also produced and marketed individual pieces of furniture as wel as furniture suites. Much of this was in historic styles but the firm also sold a smaller number of modern pieces.

Beginning in 1911, Pander was the first furniture company in the Netherlands to hire modern designers, who were mainly employed for large projects such as furnishing ocean liners. Wouda was brought in as a designer in the modern style and shortly after joining the company he became head of the Department of Modern Interior Design. The style Wouda initially adopted was primarily based on the plain undecorated furniture of Frank Lloyd Wright. His chairs for the Villa Sevensteijn, designed in 1921, for example, strongly recall the straight-backed seating that Wright designed for the Robie House a few years earlier. Unlike Wright, however, Wouda often used exotic woods, no doubt brought from the Dutch East Indies, and he painted some of his furniture in strong colors. Pander publicized Wouda's interiors widely, featuring them in showrooms as well as their company magazine Thuis (At Home). Many of Wouda's furniture designs were single pieces or suites for wealthy clients but Pander produced cheaper versions for a wider public and featured them in their showrooms.

Designers working in Wouda's department at Pander included Cor Alons (1892–1967) and J. Brunott (1889–1951). Alons left Pander in 1921 to start his own business and in 1923 he founded an interior design firm with Frits Spanjaard (1889-1978). In the interior design projects the two undertook, they followed the example of Wouda, featuring one-off cupboards, chairs, tables, and armchairs that were lacquered pieces and designed with right angles. Besides furniture, Alons also created designs for stained glass, ceramics, and enamel kitchenware. Brunott left Pander in 1923 and, like Alons and Spanjaard, produced furniture designs on commission. For the most part all the designers who had previously