worked for Pander concentrated mainly on one-off pieces, which they manufactured in small workshops.

Before joining with Alons, Spanjaard had been a designer for the idealistic LOV Furniture Factory located near The Hague. LOV was founded in 191o by Gerrit Pelt (1864–1956), whose aim was to reform society without resorting to revolution. To do so, he sought to enhance the living standards of the working class, intending to market furniture for workers as well as set up housing organizations for them. To earn revenue, his company mainly produced luxury handcrafted furniture, at first in period styles but after 1915 in a modern idiom. These pieces were also made in inexpensive versions to suit working-class budgets. 'Though the company had its own showrooms and sold a limited number of pieces to furniture retailers in other cities, the managers could not create a wide enough market for the handcrafted pieces. The company folded in 1935, unable to survive the harsh economic conditions of the Depression. Though LOV did not create successful lines of low-cost furniture, Pelt did introduce major innovations in work conditions by allowing workers to have a say in company management as well as share in the company's profits. Besides paying high wages, LOV was the first furniture factory in the Netherlands to introduce the eight-hour working day. It was also one of the first to provide paid vacations for its workers.

After 1925, the Hague School designers began to add chrome strips and handles to their furniture just as designers in Paris were doing. If there was a strong influence of the French Deco style in Holland, it was in The Hague. Custom-made pieces combined exotic woods with modern designs that could just as easily have been displayed in one of the annual French decorators' salons. Clearly the Hague School designers, following Wouda's lead, had come a long way from the Prairie Style furniture of Frank Lloyd Wright.

Wouda preferred to work for individual clients where he could control not only the furniture designs but also the placement of the pieces in the interior.

In this sense, he was not so far in principle from the Amsterdam School designers who were also opposed to mass production. By 193o, however, harsh economic conditions had reduced the demand for luxury furniture and made it necessary for Dutch furniture companies to compete with the low-priced mass-produced furniture from abroad. In 193o, Wouda left his full-time position with Pander and became a freelance interior designer, concentrating as much as he could on architectural and interior design commissions. In 1933, Pander hired a Belgian designer, J. F. Semey (1891-1973), who brought in his own commissions for interior design projects in the French Deco style. Semey also worked on ship interiors including the Holland-America Line's Nieuw Amsterdam, which he completed between 1936 and 1938.

## De Stijl

De Stijl (The Style) was an avant-garde movement founded bya Dutchman, Theovan Doesburg (1888–1931), a many-sided artist, poet, essayist, interior designer, and architect, in 1917. Whereas the Amsterdam School architects based their architecture, furniture, and decorative art on individual expression, the painters, sculptors, architects, and poets who signed the first De Stijl manifesto in 1918 were drawn together by their belief that a universal language of form could overcome the destruction of war and herald the arrival of a new spiritual consciousness. The signatories to the first De Stijl manifesto in 1918, besides van Doesburg, included artist Piet Mondrian (1872–1944), architect Robert van t'Hoff (1887–1979), artist Vilmos Huszár (1884–1960), and architect Jan Wils (1891-1972). Like Wendingen, which expressed the values of the Amsterdam School, van Doesburg's journal, De Stijl, conveyed the beliefs of his movement. The first issues carried Piet Mondrian's lengthy philosophical articles on the "nieuwe beelding or neo-plasticism, as they referred to painting. But De Stijl ideas, in fact, had their greatest impact on the design of furniture, interiors, printed matter, and architecture.

Mondrian provided much of the visual and philosophical stimulus for De Stijl. He was influenced by the work of Dutch philosopher M. H. J. Schoenmaekers, who proclaimed the spiritual significance of the horizontal and vertical line and the three primary colors. Schoenmaekers' philosophy encouraged Mondrian to break completely with the world of nature and to create painting based on a formal system of shapes and colors that could represent the state of purity he sought. Though not an official member of De Stijl, Bart van der Leck (1876–1958) was most likely the first painter in the De Stijl milieu to limit his palette to the primary colors. Vilmos Huszár (1884–196o), who had emigrated to Holland from Hungary, followed a similar path.

In the early years of De Stijl, van Doesburg and Huszár collaborated actively with several architects including van t'Hoff and J. J. P. Oud on the design of interiors. van Doesburg did not believe that painting and sculpture belonged to a separate aesthetic realm; rather, he envisioned them as a part of life and wanted to incorporate art into the design of buildings and interiors.

Working with architect van t'Hoff in 1919, van Doesburg designed the first interior to demonstrate the principles of De Stijl. It was a remodeling project for the home of Bart de Ligt, one of Holland's leading pacifists and left-wing intellectuals. In the conservatory, the four walls and the ceiling were filled with black, green, and orange rectangles, which van Doesburg later characterized in De Stijl as demonstrating "how a painterly colour distribution is possible in a threedimensional space."

De Ligt also commissioned chairs and a table for the conservatory from Gerrit Rietveld (1888–1964), a furniture maker who joined the De Stijl group for a brief period around 1919. Rietveld had taken evening classes in furniture design with the architect Piet Klaarhamer (1874-1954), who also taught van der Leck and Huszár, and he enrolled in industrial art classes at the Utrecht Museum of Arts and Crafts.

After working for others for some time, he opened his own furniture workshop in Utrecht in 1917. Furniture by Klaarhamer and the architect H. P. Berlage, as well as pieces by Frank Lloyd Wright and Charles Rennie Mackintosh, are likely sources for Rietveld's own designs. The armchair, later known as the Red and Blue chair, that he designed in 1918 before he was aware of the De Stijl group is a sculptural object, consisting of flat wooden panels for the back, seat, and sides, supported by a system of linear wooden braces. Rietveld never standardized the production of this chair and continued to refine it as he produced additional examples in his workshop. The initial ones were stained rather than painted and Rietveld did not create a version with the primary colors and black until 1923, several years after he encountered van Doesburg and the De Stijl journal (Plate 2o)

For a beechwood sideboard of 1919, Rietveld separated the sections into a flat planar surface, linear braces, and rectangular drawers. His design exposed the sideboard's structure and emphasized its efficiency. Its open construction recalls British architect E. W. Godwin's Japanese-inspired sideboard of 1867, but Rietveld went farther than Godwin in conceiving the sideboard as an assemblage of components whose separate identities are evident in the design. Once De Stijl entered its international phase around 1921, Rietveld's furniture and his later interiors and architecture came to the attention of artists and architects abroad. His vocabulary of lines and planes was severe but it enabled him to build modestly-priced modern furniture that was accessible to middle-class consumers. Besides the furniture's affordability, its formal minimalism and rectilinear structure of lines and planes became a design ideology for several generations of architects and designers.

Rietveld further developed his aesthetic of lines and planes in the house he designed together with its client, Mrs. Truus Schröder-Schräder, in 1924-1925. Built at the end of a block of a conventional row of houses in Utrecht, the Schröder house consists of a