the heater on the same cantilever principle that Mart Stam used for his chair. Conforming to modern ideas of efficiency, it looked like a technical device rather than a traditional piece of furniture. The frame could accommodate from one to three detachable heating coils depending on the user's preference.

## Philips and Fokker

Unlike Germany or the United States, much of the industrial production in the Netherlands during the 192os and 193os was by small or medium-sized firms that focused more on domestic consumption than exports. Among the exceptions was Philips, which had become a fairly large company by 1914, concentrating almost exclusively on the production of electric light bulbs. Due to Dutch neutrality in World War I, Philips increased its international marketing while its competitors in Britain and Germany were embroiled in the war effort. Anton Philips, who succeeded his brother Gerard as president in 1922, pushed the company away from heavy engineering towards consumer goods, beginning in 1918 with radio valves and continuing with loudspeakers in 1926 and finally radio receivers in 1927. Philips's first radio was so successful that the company doubled the number of its employees to 20,000 by 1929.

Initially Philips produced the radios but not their cabinets. For the latter, the company established contracts with various furniture manufacturers. Initially, the company used housings of wood as well as Bakelite, the first plastic material to be made from synthetic components. Bakelite was developed by Dr. Leo Baekeland, an American, between 1907 and 1909. Soon Philips began to manufacture its own version of the material, which it marketed as Philite. Initially the speakers and receivers of the radio sets were separate elements. After its original speaker in the shape of a saucer or dish, a form that Anton Philips championed, the company produced a seven-sided model called the Meesterzanger (Master Singer), which was available with or without legs. By 1931, Philips was combining its receivers and speakers in single units. Throughout the 193os, the shape, material, exterior decoration, and knob positions of the Philips radios changed frequently. A rectangular form became dominant and by 1931 the company had begun to produce less-expensive radios and other appliances, which differed little in technical terms from the more expensive models.

The diversion into other product lines accelerated. These included microphones, bicycle lamps, X-ray equipment, and televisions. The sales department pushed for the manufacture of combined radios and gramophones, resulting in the Philigraaf, which was marketed in a cabinet with a lid on top. In 1939, the company produced its first electric dry shaver, designed by the engineer Alexandre Horowitz (1904–1982), and marketed it as the Philishave. By this time the number of employees at Philips had grown to 45,00o.

From around 1929, Philips had its own design bureau, which employed mostly technical draftsmen and construction experts. During the 193os, decisions about new products .were usually taken at meetings attended by heads of different departments management, research, sales, and the design bureau among them. Louis Kalff (1897-1976), an architect trained at the Technical University in Delft, joined the company in 1925 to manage the artistic aspects of the company's advertising, products, and some of its architecture. Initially he created packaging for lamps and radio valves, including on the packaging for the latter a design with stars and waves that evolved into the company's logo. Though Kalff was responsible for a number of the company's product designs, it is likely that others were also involved in design decisions.

In late 1929, Philips established a Propaganda Center to coordinate all its services related to advertising. Kalff played a major role in this center where he led the Artistic Propaganda Section. Its tasks included the design of posters, show cards, advertisements, and brochures as well as cooperation on exhibitions such as the Brussels World's Fair of 1935 and the Paris Exposition of 1937, at both of which Philips had