avant-garde movement and served as a severe formalist alternative to the more decorative graphic style of Wendingen.

## Typography and book design

Sjoerd Hendrik de Roos (1877–1962) was the designer of William Morris's Art and Society in its Dutch translation (see Chapter 12). He was a socialist like Morris but not an admirer of traditional forms. His own views on typography and book design were formed by the Nieuwe Kunst, with its emphasis on the harmonious relation of typeface, text, and ornament. In 1907, de Roos joined the Lettergieterij “Amsterdam"(Type Foundry Amsterdam or TFA) as its first designer, a position he held until 1942. The TFA was one of Holland's leading foundries but neither it nor any other foundry had produced a new Dutch type for over a century. De Roos's first assignment was a series of initials embedded in squares of elaborate ornament. In 1912, the TFA released de Roos's own typeface, Hollandsche Mediaeval (Dutch Medieval), which was based on Isth-century Venetian precedents like some of the English private press types. A tasteful combination of straight lines and calligraphic curves, Hollandsche Mediaeval came to be considered as a typically Dutch typeface and replaced the printers’ dependence on foreign imports. It was widely used by designers of books and publications and provided a strong impetus for the Dutch printing industry to actively engage in the design of typefaces and ornaments.

De Roos designed other typefaces throughout his career at the TFA. In 1916 the foundry released his Ella Cursief (Ella Italic), a script face. It was followed in 1923 by Erasmus Mediaeval, a lighter version of Hollandsche Mediaeval, which also appeared two years later in a bolder version called Grotius. Like their predecessor, Erasmus Medieval and Grotius were also used extensively for fine printing. Other types that de Roos created included Nobel, a san serif face produced in 1929 as the TFA's response to Futura; Egmont (1932), a more decorative face; and Libra, de Roos's least successful effort. It was released in 1938 as a modern uncial type that combined elements of upper- and lower-case Fraktur letters in a single alphabet.

Besides designing types for the TFA, de Roos worked for other clients as a graphic artist, producing hand lettering for posters, labels, book jackets, title pages, and other printed material. As a designer of books, he had a long-term relationship with the Rotterdam publisher W. L. and J. Brusse, which was the first to use his Hollandsche Mediaeval. Besides Brusse's commitment to produce books of high quality with carefully chosen paper, type, and illustrations, the firm was inclined to publish books by socialist writers like Henriëtte Roland Holst-Van der Schalk, wife of the artist Richard Nicholas Roland Holst, who was also active in socialist politics. Between 1919 and 1932, Brusse published the yearbooks for the VANK, choosing artists as diverse as de Roos and Vilmos Huszár to design the volumes.

De Roos's greatest rival as a type and book designer was Jan van Krimpen (1892–1958). Fifteen years younger than de Roos, van Krimpen was unaffected by the Nieuwe Kunst as de Roos had been; neither did he share de Roos's interest in socialist ideals. He would eventually criticize de Roos's typefaces and books as being excessively decorated while de Roos complained that van Krimpen's designs were too sterile. Of the two, van Krimpen's typefaces were known and used outside the Netherlands while de Roos's were of primary interest at home.

The differences between the two designers were enhanced by the fact that they were affiliated with rival type foundries. In 1931, van Krimpen began an association with the Joh. Enschedé en Zonen type foundry in Haarlem. Enschedé was established at the beginning of the 18th century and had remained in the hands of the same family. The firm had a large collection of historic types and punches, which served as a great resource for later designs. Among its first 2oth-century faces was a Javanese script that the Colonial Office used to print publications for the Dutch East Indies.