of their best work for the agency. Nicolaas P. de Koo (1881–1960) had first worked for the PTT in 1918 as an interior designer, but by the 193os he contributed to the agency as a graphic designer, having a large responsibility for the overall PTT image during those years. Among his other clients were the Rotterdam School Association, for whom he designed various printed materials including stationery and reports, and the city of Rotterdam, for which he produced a number of illustrative charts.

## Other Dutch modernists

Besides the graphic designers who worked within a Functionalist framework, others were more eclectic in their approaches to typography and layout. Hendrik Nicolaas Werkman (1882–1945), an artist and a printer rather than a designer, is an excellent example. Though his work has had a strong impact on designers, Werkman does not fit easily into any camp or canon. He spent much of his life in the city of Groningen where he ran a modest printing business that had varying degrees of success until his death.

Backed by considerable experience in the design of routine printed matter——wedding and birth announcements, brochures, stationery, posters and the like—Werkman began in 1923 to publish a little magazine which had an English name, The Next Call. By temperament a libertarian, Werkman's typography expressed his disdain for conventions and his espousal of an individual voice. He combined blocks of linear text with expressive compositions of letters and elements from the type case, generating novel designs with his variance of letter sizes, weights, and positions. In more than 6oo monotype prints, which he called druksels, and in the jobbing pieces he produced, Werkman experimented as well with varied textures that resulted from different inking techniques.

Though similar to Zwart's NKF ads in some ways, Werkman's layouts for The Next Call show less concern for a new reading syntax than an interest in artistic arrangements of type. He also emphasized the imperfections of hand printing, evincing little interest in the transparency of mechanical reproduction (Plate 22). Werkman distributed The Next Call to his friends and associates, using it as a forum to attack the complacency of some colleagues in the local artists' group, De Ploeg, to which he belonged.

Werkman's influence was most clearly evident in the work of Willem Sandberg (1897-1984), who acknowledged him to be his mentor. Sandberg was a professional graphic designer rather than an artist, but he always considered art to be an important component of his sensibility. He began as an art student in Amsterdam but left after a brief period and eventually studied law and the humanities. While in Vienna, where he went to study psychology around 1926, he came into contact with the system of pictorial statistics, ISOTYPE, that the sociologist Otto Neurath devised, and he undertook several projects using Neurath's system when he returned to the Netherlands at the end of the 1920s.

Sandberg became a graphic designer without any formal training. He came to understand design as a means of social betterment through his contacts with young designers in the VANK and the members of De 8 en Opbouw, the architectural group to which Paul Schuitema and other designers also belonged. His background in law, the social sciences, and philosophy, combined with his knowledge of pictorial statistics, prepared him for some of his first jobs as a designer. In 1928 he designed a chart for an exhibition on employment for the disabled at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam, which was dedicated to the display of modern art, and in 1936 the museum hired him as a curator. In this position, he began to organize exhibitions of painting, sculpture, and design for which he created the catalogs and related materials. He also continued his work for other clients with an emphasis on book covers, brochures, and catalogs.

Werkman's influence was evident in Sandberg's approach to graphic design rather than in any formal similarities. Like Werkman, he considered each project