with an open mind and let his ideas evolve into a distinctive form. He was not doctrinaire, and readily mixed old and new typefaces in tasteful combinations without the visual acrobatics of Zwart or his followers. Though well established by the end of the 193os, Sandberg would become internationally recognized in the years after World War II, particularly for the expressive catalogs and posters he designed for exhibitions at the Stedelijk Museum.

The other designer known for an equally open attitude to his work was Dick Elffers (1910–1990), who had a close relation to the doctrinaire Functionalists Schuitema and Zwart but eventually went beyond their constraints. He studied at the Rotterdam Academy, where his most influential teacher was Jac Jongert. Though Elffers accepted Jongert's claim that subjectivity was essential for the graphic designer, he subsequently spent three years as an assistant to Paul Schuitema and then three more in the office of Piet Zwart, both strict devotees of an objective style. Among his early projects were advertisements and calendars that reflected the influence of both Zwart and Schuitema in their typographic layout and use of photography. He alsc experimented with photomontage. By 1937, Elffers had rejected the limitations of photography and the antagonism of his former teachers to drawing, a gesture that became particularly evident in the painterly posters he became known for in the 1950s and 1960s.

## Belgium

## Henry van de Velde

In 1926, Henry van de Velde returned to Belgium after many years abroad. Belgium's leading Art Nouveau designer at the end of the 19th century, van de Velde had gone to Germany in 19oı and remained there until 1917, when the war was near its end. In Germany, van de Velde was the founder and director of the Weimar School of Arts and Crafts, which became the Bauhaus after World War I. He was also a leading figure in the Deutscher Werkbund, defending the role of the artist in industry during the organization's famous debate of 1914.

From Germany, van de Velde went to Switzerland and then the Netherlands before returning to Belgium. After World War I, Victor Horta, the other major figure besides van de Velde in Belgium's Art Nouveau movement, had become the director of the Académie Royale des Beaux Arts in Brussels and assumed a dominant role among Belgian architects and designers. Once an innovative architect, Horta had reverted to a conservative Neo-Classicism, which was evident in his design of the Belgian Pavilion for the 1925 Exposition des Arts Décoratifs in Paris. Initially, the Belgians planned to invite a group of young architects to design a low-cost housing project for the exhibition, but an influential group that supported Horta challenged the idea. Within the pavilion, furniture by both traditional and modern designers was displayed. A major exhibitor was De Coene Frères, Belgium's leading furniture manufacturer at the time. Earlier the firm had produced furniture influenced by the Arts and Crafts movement and Art Nouveau, including van de Velde's designs, but for the Paris exhibition De Coene Frères featured furniture in traditional historic styles.

The conservatism of Belgium's Pavilion in Paris reflected the overall attitude of the country towards design. Belgium was one of the few countries in Europe not to have an organization that promoted closer cooperation between art and industry. Traditional regionalism prevailed and there was a strong suspicion of ideas from abroad, particularly from Germany Belgium's opponent in World War I——and the Soviet Union, where the Bolsheviks had instituted a radical new political regime.

For many in Belgium's design establishment, van de Velde was suspect because of his long association with Germany, but others still recognized him as Belgium's most famous international designer. King Albert I encouraged his return to Belgium, and Camille Huysmans, whom van de Velde had known earlier in socialist circles, offered him the opportunity to found