and direct a new design school. Van de Velde had discussed plans for such a school as early as 1912 when he hoped to extend the ideas of his Weimar academy to Belgium. At the time, steps were taken to found the school but the plans did not come to fruition.

With the strong support of Huysmans, then Minister of Sciences and the Arts, and the approval of King Albert I, the Institut Supérieur des Arts Décoratifs (Higher Institute of Decorative Arts) or ISAD opened its doors in the historic Abbey of La Cambre in 1927. Van de Velde assembled a faculty consisting of artists, architects, and designers who were leaders in Belgium's progressive arts community. Among them were the architects Victor Bourgeois (1897–1962) and Huib Hoste (1881–1957), the engraver Joris Minne (1897–1987), the weaver Elizabeth De Saedeleer (1902–1972), the typographer and poster artist Lucien de Roeck (1915-2002) and the Surrealist painter Paul Delvaux (1897–1944).

Initially the workshops included design for the theater, ornamentation for the applied arts, and weaving, while architecture was added shortly thereafter. The school also had a print shop where van de Velde revived in a modern form the tradition of fine printing that the British private press movement had inspired. He considered ISAD to be third in a line of great design schools whose precedents were his own Weimar Academy and the Bauhaus. Its objective was to reinstate the values of function and social purpose that had animated van de Velde's earlier work during the Art Nouveau years in Belgium and his practice and teaching in Germany.

## 7 Arts

Counter to the dominant conservatism of Belgium's architecture and design community was the avant-garde movement 7 Arts, which was active between 1922 and 1929. The members of 7 Arts were painters, sculptors, architects, planners, designers, and writers who believed in a unity of the arts, hence the title of their movement and that of the French-language journal that chronicled their theories and projects. Among the leading figures were the designer and theoretician Marcel Baugniet (1896–1995), the architect Victor Bourgeois (1897-1962), his brother the poet Pierre Bourgeois (1898–1976), the architect and furniture designer Huib Hoste, the painter and designer Karl Maes (1900–1974), the painter and designer Jozef Peeters (1895-1960), and the artist and designer Victor Servranckx (1897–1965).

Unlike other avant-garde movements such as Futurism, Constructivism, and De Stijl, 7 Arts did not have a single visual style that was evident in the work of all its members. They were open to ideas from all the avant-garde movements and engaged actively with them. Compared to many of their Belgian colleagues in architecture and the applied arts, they were outspoken advocates of modern design and mass production. Their broad interest in the general environment ranged from advertising and street lighting to theater decor, furniture, architecture, and urban planning. Of these, they emphasized the significance of architecture and advocated the use of new industrial materials as well as an austere formal style that was antagonistic to ornamentation. Their views on design ran counter to the dominant Belgian emphasis on luxury goods and fine craftsmanship. Instead, they espoused standardization and design that was dictated by social needs.

Despite their interest in mass production, most of their designs were single objects, usually created for particular interiors. Marcel Baugniet, also a painter and graphic artist, created furniture in wood and occasional pieces in chrome and glass. Victor Servranckx, Huib Hoste, and the interior designer and photographer Willy Kessels (1898-1974) created a Functionalist interior for the Belgian Pavilion at the 1925 expo. Karl Maes was most engaged with furniture design. He designed dining room suites, chairs, beds, and display cabinets of wood that the Brussels furniture workshop of Victor de Cunsel manufactured. Though Maes had an active relationship with Theo van Doesburg, his furniture designs showed none of the rigor of De Stijl nor did they possess the elegance of the more industrialized furniture of Mart Stam, Marcel Breuer, or Mies