# Bibliography Bibliographic essay

> Section: bibliography | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Bibliography Bibliographic essay

John Willett, Art and Politics in the Weimar Period: The New Sobriety, 1917-1933 is an overview of Weimar culture that draws together many of its facets including art, architecture, design, literature, theater, and music. Tilmann Buddensieg's edited volume Berlin 1900-1933: Architecture and Design has a more limited focus. Gert Selle discusses product design specifically in Design — Geschichte in Deutschland: Produktkultur als Entwurf und Erfahrung. Twentieth-Century Furniture Design by Klaus Jürgen Sembach, Gabriele Leuthäuser, and Peter Gössel is a good reference for German furniture design during this period. Matilda McQuaid's exhibition catalog Lilly Reich: Designer and Architect adds to the limited literature on German women as designers during the Weimar years. Heinz Hirdina, Neues Bauen, Neues Gestalten: Das Neue Frankfurt/Die Neue Stadt. Eine Zeitschrift zwischen 1926 und 1933 and Karin Kirsch, The Weissenhofsiedlung: Experimental Housing Built for the Deutscher Werkbund both look at the design of furniture and goods for domestic use within the context of the ambitious Weimar building program. The German interest in scientific management and efficiency is discussed in Judith A. Merkle, Management and Ideology: The Legacy of the International Scientific Management Movement. Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts devotes considerable attention to the later activities of the organization in the Weimar period.

The Bauhaus literature is vast and I only used a few general surveys. Hans Wingler, Bauhaus: Weimar, Dessau, Berlin, Chicago is encyclopedic in its inclusion of photographs and documents, while Frank Whitford, Bauhaus is a good short summary although its emphasis on the Weimar period as opposed to Dessau is somewhat out of balance. Bauhaus and Bauhaus People, edited by Eckhard Neumann, has first-hand accounts by Bauhaus professors and others related to one or another incarnation of the Bauhaus. See also, Winfried Nerdinger, Bauhaus-Moderne im Nationalsozialismus: Zwischen Anbiederung und Verfolgung. Much more research is needed on other design schools in the Weimar Republic. Two excellent studies are Wilhelm Nauhaus, Die Burg Giebichenstein: Geschichte einer Deutschen Kunstschule, 1915–1933 and Albert Reimann, Die Reimann-Schule in Berlin.

For the study of graphic design in the Weimar Republic, the pioneering book on this topic is Eckhard Neumann, Functional Graphic Design in the 20's. Jeremy

Aynsley, Graphic Design in Germany, 1890–1945 provides a broad overview, while Leslie Cabarga, Progressive German Graphics 1900-1937 and Steven Heller and Louise Fili, German Modern: Graphic Design from Wilhelm to Weimar are most valuable as visual compilations of German advertising graphics. Both H. K. Frenzel, Ludwig Hohlwein and the volume edited by Christian Schneegass, Ludwig Hohlwein: Plakate der Jahre 1906–1940 document primarily the many advertising posters that Hohlwein did for his commercial clients. Jaroslav Andel, Avant-Garde Page Design, 1900–1950 and Steven Heller, Merz to Emigre and Beyond: Avant-Garde Magazine Design of the Twentieth Century are both excellent references for avant-garde design in Weimar. On Berlin Dada and design, see Stephen Foster and Rudolf Kuenzli, eds., Dada Spectrum: The Dialectics of Revolt and Sherwin Simmons' excellent article, "Advertising Seizes Control of Life: Berlin Dada and the Power of Advertising," Oxford Art Journal 22, no. I (1999). Simmons has also written about the contentiousness of Weimar political graphics in two important articles, "Grimaces on the Walls: Anti-Bolshevist Posters and the Debate about Kitsch,’ Design Issues 14, no. 2 (Summer 1998) and “Hand to the Friend, Fist to the Foe': The Struggle of Signs in the Weimar Republic," Journal of Design History 13, no. 4 (2ooo). I discuss German Constructivism, especilly the involvement of Moholy-Nagy and Lissitzky, and its contribution to avant-garde design in The Struggle for Utopia: Rodchenko, Lissitzky, Moholy-Nagy, 1917–1946. Werner Schmalenbach makes some mention of Kurt Schwitters'graphic design within the larger context of his art activity but one volume of the exhaustive fourvolume exhibition catalog, "Typographie kann unter Umständen Kunst sein," edited by Volker Rattmeyer, Dietrich Helms, and Konrad Matschke, is dedicated solely to Schwitters graphic design, while two others focus on the ring neue werbegestalter of which Schwitters was a central figure.

Sebastian Carter includes chapters on typographers Rudolf Koch, Georg Trump, and Jan Tschichold in Twentieth Century Type Designers, while Christopher Burke, Paul Renner: The Art of Typography; Gerald Cinamon, Rudolf Koch: Letterer, Type Designer, Teacher, Ruari McLean, Jan Tschichold: Typographer, and Werner Klemke's edited volume, Leben und Werk des Typographen Jan Tschichold discuss their subjects in greater depth. Left-wing political design, especially the work of John Heartfield, is covered in Peter Pachnicke and Klaus Honef, eds, John Heartfield and in the smal catalog of an exhibit on the Malik-Verlag edited by James Fraser, Malik-Verlag, 1916–1947: Berlin, Prague, New York. Gisèle Freund, Photography and Society and Tim N. Gidal, Modern Photojournalism: Origin and Evolution, 1910–1933 are excellent sources of material on popular illustrated magazines and photojournalism in the Weimar period.

