# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

Between 188o and World War I, a group of European powers consolidated their control over most of Africa. Through military conquest and other means, they instituted a system of colonies, protectorates, and mandates that gave them the right to determine the conditions of life in their new African possessions. Portugal was the first European nation to establish a colony in Africa-Angola—in the 16th century, while Britain and France, the two nations that eventually controlled the largest part of the continent, did not actively begin to claim African territory until the late 19th century.

Some basic rules for dividing the continent were established at the Berlin Conference that the German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck convened in 1884. As a consequence of this meeting, Britain came to possess much of southern Africa, most of the east, and some of the west, while France dominated Sub-Saharan West Africa as well as the Maghreb, which comprised Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco. Britain occupied Egypt and the Sudan in the early 188os, but for the purposes of this volume, Egypt has been included in the chapter on the Middle and Near East, due to its closer economic and cultural ties to that region.

Portugal's principal colonies were Angola and Mozambique. Italy conquered portions of north and east Africa that had remained independent until 1936 Eritrea, Libya, Somaliland, and later Ethiopia. Germany claimed several scattered territories in southern Africa, but these were subsequently divided among some of the other colonial powers, following the Germans' defeat in World War I. In 1885, King Leopold of Belgium established the Congo Free State in central Africa as his private preserve, although it became a Belgian colony in 19o8. Initially, Liberia was the only territory besides Ethiopia that remained independent. South Africa joined the British Commonwealth as a republic in 191o following a merger of four separate territories—two British colonies and two former Boer provinces.

Colonialism had mixed consequences. On the one hand, the European powers occupied territories that belonged to Africans and imposed alien political and economic conditions on them. On the other hand, colonial practices resulted in demarcated territorial boundaries that later became the borders of new nation states. As a result of colonial economic policies, a growing number of Africans came to participate in the international market economy, though largely as providers of raw materials or as laborers in foreign enterprises such as mines.

The predominant colonial practice was to import raw materials from Africa and export European manufactured goods in return. As a result, increasing portions of the previous indigenous economies were brought within the orbit of colonial interests. The colonial governments were not inclined to promote manufacturing in Africa, given that the colonies had become markets for European products and sources of raw materials; hence relatively few factories were established during the colonial period.

In Britain, the Colonial Development Act was passed in 1929, but almost none of its funding was directed towards local industries. As late as 1935, the governors of several East African colonies stated at a conference in London that industrialization would be unwise in their colonies as it would jeopardize the production of agricultural products on which Britain depended. Earlier, William Ormsby-Gore, the Colonial Secretary, declared in Parliament that neither the peoples nor the financial conditions in the colonies lent themselves to factory conditions. By 1939, only 2 percent of the cash from the Colonial

Development Fund had been allocated for manufacturing industry. Many French companies that feared competition from indigenous producers also opposed African industrialization

One consequence of colonialism that affected labor practices positively was the colonial powers' opposition to slavery. The historical process whereby Africans sold slaves internally and to foreign traders did not end immediately with the beginning of colonial occupation, but it did decline over time. The colonial powers, however, adopted coercive labor practices particularly to meet the needs of large-scale mining and agricultural enterprises and the construction of railroads. They also imposed burdensome taxes on their colonial subjects.

It may be of value to compare the impact of colonialism in Africa with that of the Industrial Revolution in Europe, while recognizing that there were significant differences between the two continents. Both had in common the building of infrastructure, notably, roads, ports, and railroads and the introduction of motorized transport for moving goods. Between the 187os and the 193os, thousands of miles of railroad track were laid in Africa. The principal purpose was to ensure the transport of raw materials from remote locations to ports from whence the materials could be shipped to Europe. Consequently the routes favored the development of an export market rather than one that featured internal trade

Europeans owned and ran the railroads, though some Africans were trained to work as mechanics in the maintenance workshops. Rolling stock was imported from abroad. Cars, trucks, and buses were also brought from overseas, although African entrepreneurs ran a number of the transport services at this scale. Gasoline was provided by foreign oil companies such as Shell, which began to install gas pumps during the late 192os.

What did not happen in Africa was the growth of a factory system. Since European manufacturers preferred to sell their own goods to African consumers, there was little incentive to create such a system.

Extensive industrialization did occur in the Belgian Congo, due to the generous concessions that King Leopold offered to foreign manufacturers. There and elsewhere, foreign-owned processing plants for palm oil and other products were built, thus enhancing the efficiency of transforming indigenous raw materials into useful commodities.

Unlike Europe, neither an entrepreneurial class nor a widespread middle class emerged as a consequence of the limited manufacturing in Africa. There was no mass consumption, although the opening of mines, the establishment of plantations, and the introduction of other European enterprises did create an incipient working class, but it was not one with much money to spend. Southern Africa is perhaps the only region where an African factory system did lead to mass production and middle-class consumers, but these were all white people since South Africa's and Southern Rhodesia's large black populations remained socially and economically subjugated.

The economist Samir Amin has introduced the term "peripheral capitalism" to characterize the colonial economic system in Africa. He considers it one that had a high degree of integration into the world capitalist market but a low degree of internal development. A major difference from the Industrial Revolution in Europe is that agriculture continued to predominate, given that agricultural products comprised Africa's principal export commodities.

Colonialism did, nonetheless, lead to greater urbanization. At the end of the 19th century most Africans lived in small villages or towns. A limited number inhabited larger communities, some of which had grown from earlier tribal capitals or had become centers of trade or agriculture. This remained the case throughout the 192os and 193os, even as economic activity stimulated growth. However, the new urban areas did not grow organically. They housed considerable numbers of European administrators who were in Africa for limited periods, while also providing lodging for large groups of laborers who had left their villages to work in colonial enterprises. In the Belgian Congo and Northern Rhodesia, towns formed around mining businesses and more closely represented the traditional company towns in Europe. In Senegal, on the other hand, Dakar, where about half the total industry of French West Africa was concentrated before 1939, became a center of diverse enterprises and activities, while urban centers elsewhere like Lagos, Accra, Abidjan, Mombasa, and Nairobi grew into small cities that accommodated a greater range of living situations than did the company towns or the nouvelles villes in the Maghreb whose primary purpose was to house the families of French administrators and entrepreneurs. By the 193os, Johannesburg in South Africa had become Africa's largest and most cosmopolitan city, with the exception of Cairo.

