# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

Though India, Hong Kong, and Burma were all British colonies, each embodied a very different set of conditions for the development of crafts, manufacturing, and design. At the beginning of the 2oth century, promoters of industrialization in India faced uncountable odds— Indian resistance in the British colony, lack of capital and personnel, and especially the absence of a market for mass-produced products. The resistance effort was further complicated by the extensive Indian debates that ranged from all-out support for industrial development on a Western model to Gandhi's extreme exhortation for a simple life of self-sufficiency. The short-lived swadeshi movement in Bengal extended the 19th-century desire to be free of British goods and prepared the way for Gandhi's call for Swaraj that combined swadeshi practices of economic self-sufficiency with a political strategy of resisting the British on a much wider front. Industrialists were frustrated with Gandhi's antagonism to machines and his espousal of a simple rural life, but they benefited from his ability to galvanize masses of people to struggle for independence. E. B. Havell's and Ananda Coomaraswamy's craft romanticism and Alfred Chatterton's advocacy of small-scale enterprises each had merit but did not provide economic solutions for the rural masses on the one hand or support for ambitious industrialists on the other. Consequently, the period in India from the turn of the century to the end of World War II was a complicated mix of competing strategies for economic betterment, all of which remained useful after independence when the new Indian government had more leeway to consider approaches to economic development that were not encumbered by the need to overcome Britain's inclination to impede them.

As with India, Britain did not encourage industrialization in the Southeast Asian region, preferring instead to extract raw materials and sell their own massproduced goods. Hong Kong was an exception, due to its long history of entrepreneurial activity, which continued actively under British rule.

It was not just the Western countries that sold their products in Southeast Asia and Hong Kong, however. The region was a huge market for Japanese and Chinese goods. Calendar posters created in China were distributed to Chinese communities in Hong Kong and throughout Southeast Asia to advertise these products. Among those who profited from the Chinese networks was Aw Boon Haw, the entrepreneur in Burma who invented Tiger Balm.

