# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

No single model characterizes the way design was managed in the European dictatorial regimes from the 192os to World War II. Benito Mussolini became Italy's Prime Minister in 1922 and remained in office until his ouster in 1943. Though he fostered an architectural and visual rhetoric that was grandiose and bombastic, modernist architecture, furniture design, and graphics also flourished during his reign. In essence, Mussolini had no overarching vision of how design could serve the state, although much public architecture and most propaganda employed an imposing style that easily became associated with the Fascist Party

In Germany, the architects and designers who forged a new modern style in the Weimar Republic before Hitler came to power were harassed by the Nazis after Hitler became Chancellor and most left Germany. The Nazi Party sought to instate a traditional Heimat or homeland style that was associated with conservative nationalist traditions. The party's heavy hand was most evident in its visual propaganda, which ranged from posters to exhibitions, but it could also be seen in architecture, where classicism determined the rhetoric of public buildings and folk forms the appearance of numerous smaller structures and private dwellings. Nonetheless, many design values from the Weimar years continued, though in a different form, particularly the aim to provide decent housing for the working class and basic functional furniture forms for the home and workplace. As well, Henry Ford's example of a low-cost mass-produced automobile that was accessible to large numbers of people became an ideal of Hitler's even though the decision to produce armaments in the late 193os prevented him from realizing it. In essence, the Nazis pursued a design policy of what the late historian John Heskett called “modernism and archaism," shifting from modernity to tradition as it suited the needs of a particular policy or strategy.

In the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin had no use for the modern ideas of the avant-garde and from the time he became the undisputed leader of the nation in the late 192os, he cracked down on avant-garde proposals to create new architecture, graphics, and all other forms of design. He closed the national deign school, Vkhutemas, and instituted a monumental style of Socialist Realism that was adopted for all art forms from literature and painting to photography, exhibitions, and architecture. The style was particularly evident in the Soviet arts and in propaganda but could be seen as well in the heavy-handed buildings that were constructed during Stalin's reign.

When António de Oliveira Salazar became Prime Minister of Portugal in 1926, he instituted what came to be called the Estado Novo or New State. He established a Secretariat of Propaganda but did not espouse a ponderous visual style. In fact, many of the artists who worked for the Estado Novo came from the modernist milieu that preceded it. However, like Mussolini, Hitler, and Stalin, Salazar promoted large propagandistic exhibitions that became highly visible examples of state power.

