# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

In 1902, Cuba gained its independence from Spain, the last country in Latin America to do so. Political independence, however, did not translate easily into democratic governance in the region and much of Latin America continued to be ruled by wealthy elites or dictators in the period prior to World War II. By the end of the 193os and the beginning of the 194os, fascist governments in Italy, Germany, Spain, Portugal, and the Soviet Union became powerful precedents for the rise of dictators and authoritarian leaders in some Latin American countries such as Getulio Vargas in Brazil, Lázaro Cárdenas in Mexico, and in General Agustín Pedro Justo in Argentina.

Until World War I, the ruling classes, which controlled their respective nations' land and resources, preferred to export raw materials and agricultural produce rather than create industrial economies. In Brazil, plantation owners exported coffee, which was also central to the economies of Colombia and Central America. In addition, the latter relied heavily on marketing bananas. Beef and grains were leading exports in Argentina as was sugar in Cuba, while tin mining in Bolivia, copper mining in Chile, and silver mining in Peru enabled those countries to participate respectively in the international economy. In the late 192os, the discovery of oil deposits in Mexico and Venezuela provided substantial income from abroad. In all these enterprises, local peasants performed the unskilled hard labor, while skilled workers were brought in from overseas to fill positions that required prior training or education.

Within the local Latin American social hierarchies, entrepreneurs were not held in high regard, consequently immigrants became the leading businessmen. Spaniards, Italians, and Germans were prominent in Argentina, Germans and Italians in Uruguay, while Portuguese, Italians, and Germans constituted the main immigrant populations in Brazil Local elites encouraged immigration to offset the lack of skilled laborers, and immigrants found ample opportunities to establish enterprises that ranged from printing plants to the manufacture of durable goods.

Despite the emphasis on exporting agricultural products and raw materials, industrialization developed gradually in a few Latin American countries before World War I. The war, which cut off Latin America from its European suppliers, accelerated the process of import substitution, or replacing imported products with locally made goods. By the end of the 192os, active industrial sectors had begun to burgeon in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Uruguay.

Unlike Europe or the United States, where the invention of new machines and devices helped to transform small craft workshops into large mechanized factories, industrialization in Latin America happened in a more piecemeal fashion. Some enterprises such as large breweries, flourmills, and cigarette factories imported advanced machinery, but many products such as foodstuffs, leather goods, metalware, furniture, and clothing were largely produced in workshops with limited numbers of workers. Frequently these were family businesses. As the economic historian Colin Lewis points out, the small workshops continued to operate alongside the more advanced factories, thus making it impossible to transform entire industries. Importing machinery was difficult but a number of repair shops that had been established to maintain foreign machines, including railway locomotives, were able to develop into shops that could build their own machinery, which they then marketed within the country.

A further obstacle to the transformation of small labor-intensive enterprises into larger factories was the reluctance of banks to finance their expansion. These small businesses persisted as well because governments were slow to establish departments or ministries of industry that could develop national policies to support industrial development. One exception to limited local production was the manufacture of weapons, which was carried out in national armories. Weapons production was expanded in Brazil during the Vargas dictatorship in the late 193os to include the development of Latin America's only indigenous aircraft industry.

The isolation of Europe from Latin America because of World War I cleared the way for the United States to develop an aggressive policy of marketing its goods in the southern hemisphere. Conversely, the United States became the largest market for Latin American exports.

The aim to increase American trade with Latin America was initiated in 1889 at the First International Conference of American States, held in Washington, DC. At subsequent conferences convened at periodic intervals, this interest was advanced through various inter-American organizations and committees that led to the formation of the Pan American Union, which established its headquarters in Washington. Shortly after Franklin D. Roosevelt became President in 1933, he launched the Good Neighbor Policy through which he sought to develop relations between the United States and the Latin American nations that were based on mutual cooperation and trust. The policy was motivated in part to protect and further American economic interests in Latin America, which by this time were extensive.

Writing in 1936, business historian Dudley Phelps mentioned six variants of product manufacturing and marketing that American companies employed in Latin America. These ranged from complete production in a local plant to designing the packaging for already finished imported goods. In between, Phelps included the local assembly of products based on parts designed to American specifications. As an example, he cited the Otis elevator whose production in Argentina featured a combination of manufacturing and assembly, whereby the core apparatus was imported and other parts were made locally.

When Ford and General Motors began to sell automobiles in Latin America in the mid-192os, they established assembly plants that required few locally manufactured parts. Firms such as National Cash Register, Singer Sewing Machines, International Harvester, and the United Shoe Manufacturing Corporation employed large numbers of local people, who were hired primarily for marketing operations, although some assembly was often involved. The prevalence ofthese American companies with their widespread distribution and advertising networks and their highlydeveloped manufacturing methods made it difficult for local enterprises to compete. Consequently there was considerably less local production of durable goods than there was in the non-durable sectors that included cosmetics, soap, liquor, tobacco, and foodstuffs. Local enterprises also made clothing and shoes, profiting from textile manufacturing, which was far more advanced in Latin America than was the production of machines, appliances, or transport vehicles

Because so many durable goods came from abroad, even if some were assembled locally, there was little opportunity to develop a profession of industrial design compared to Europe or the United States, where manufacturers with advanced production capabilities relied on designers to create new products for the market. Consequently, product design in Latin America before World War II was practiced primarily as a decorative art with a concentration on furniture for one-off and serial production. Also included were other objects for domestic use such as lamps, glassware, ceramics, and ironwork. As a counterpart to the trained decorative artists, some of whom came from abroad and others who were trained in local art schools, craftsmen in small workshops continued to make objects for daily use such as furniture and pots and pans, while some factories produced locally-designed stoves, refrigerators, and even vehicles such as trucks or buses.

When the Museum of Modern Art in New York held a Latin American industrial design competition in 194o to coincide with the competition for its exhibition, Organic Design in Home Furnishings, entries were received from 17 countries. Several of the winning designs came from European architects or designers who had emigrated to Latin America: Bernard Rudofsky (1905-1988) in Brazil and two former Bauhaus students in Mexico, Michael van Beuren (191-2004) and Klaus Grabe (dates unconfirmed). Also from Mexico, the Cuban émigré designer Clara Porset (1932-1981) and her husband Xavier Guerrero (1896-1974) submitted an exemplary prize-winning suite of furniture conceived for rural use featuring cabinets, tables, and a cot and chair that used a traditional webbing material called ixtle.

Compared to the near absence of industrial designers, commercial artists were active throughout Latin America. Producing illustrated advertisements for newspapers and magazines was a primary task. Advertising posters were displayed less widely than in Europe but were nonetheless commissioned to promote products as well as films in the emerging domestic and imported film industries in Argentina, Mexico, Brazil, and Cuba. Commercial artists also found ample work designing packaging and labels as well as the occasional logotype for domestic and foreign companies.

The middle classes in all Latin American countries grew rapidly between 190o and 1939, partly due to immigration but also to the expansion of public and higher education and the growing number of jobs in industry and the public sector. One consequence was a rise in literacy that led to a proliferation of newspapers, journals, books, and magazines. Publishers employed large numbers of artists, art directors, and caricaturists to illustrate and design their publications, which formed the basis for public discourse about politics and culture in the various countries. Argentina had the largest middle class and consequently became a center of book publishing for all Latin America, but almost every country published some books and had one or more illustrated magazines that featured articles on topics ranging from film and furniture to art, politics, music, and literature.

Latin Americans were well informed about cultural tendencies in Europe and the United States to which they were exposed through reading, travel, and visits from prominent foreign visitors such as F. T. Marinetti, Blaise Cendrars, and Le Corbusier. Many Latin American artists and intellectuals strove to be modern, but they wished to be so on their own terms, hence modern tendencies from abroad were filtered through strong impulses to forge national identities, which frequently incorporated indigenous themes. French culture had been the dominant influence on Latin American intellectuals in the 19th century and continued to be so in the 2oth. In architecture, the Art Deco style, first introduced at the 1925 Exposition Internationale des Arts Décoratifs in Paris, captured the imagination of numerous Latin American architects though many continued to rely on classical styles and in some cases indigenous forms. There was less interest in the more austere and politically engaged modern movement in architecture of Germany and the Netherlands or the radical architectural propositions of the Soviet Constructivists, but Le Corbusier's visits to several Latin American countries introduced architects to his version of the modern movement, which took root particularly in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. The Bauhaus had little influence on design or design pedagogy in Latin America, with the exception of Mexico, where the architect and former Bauhaus director Hannes Meyer lived for some years, beginning in 1939, and Josef and Anni Albers visited in the 1930s.

Latin American artists and writers were cognizant of the European avant-garde movements-- Expressionism, Cubism, Futurism, and Dada-—and these exercised a considerable influence on them. Latin America, however, had its own avant-gardes, which produced modern paintings, sculptures, novels, and poetry. They also spawned literary journals with layouts that were sometimes playful and covers that were always visually striking

Hollywood had the strongest influence on the Latin American cinema, which developed primarily as an art form for the masses rather than the elite. Latin American film industries had their own directors, actors, and technicians, but they faced heavy competition from American film companies, which frequently made movies in Spanish for Latin American audiences.

Despite the strong influences from Europe and the United States, Latin American artists and intellectuals were deeply concerned with issues of cultural independence and national identity. Consequently, they looked abroad for the latest developments but adapted them to their own conditions and concerns. Advances were made as well through the many accomplished immigrants who contributed to the development of the decorative and commercial arts in most Latin American countries.

