# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

Industrialization in China during the period between the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911 and the Japanese invasion in 1937 proceeded slowly. The foreign companies that operated in the treaty ports were exceptions to the slow development in the vast rural areas that were dedicated primarily to farming. Of the numerous treaty ports, Shanghai was the one where modernity took hold in its most blatant form. It was not only evident in the city's sizeable manufacturing base but also in its widespread openness to Western influences.

The collapse of the Qing dynasty, due to impatience with the Manchu rulers' resistance to reform, was spurred by the rise of a revolutionary movement led by Sun Yat-sen. He served briefly as president of a new democratic Republic of China before the military leader Yuan Shikai, who had been prime minister in the Qing government, replaced him. Sun Yat-sen then became the leader of a new political party, the Guomindang (National Party), which played a major role in the political struggles of the ensuing years.

In 1914, Japan declared war on Germany and seized Kiaochow, a German colonial territory in China's Shandong province. 'The following year Japan presented China with Twenty-one Demands that included the right to occupy Kiaochow and to colonize Manchuria and Mongolia and a claim to considerable control over China's military and economic affairs. The Chinese government accepted a negotiated version of the demands, although the ensuing treaties were never ratified.

When Yuan Shikai died in mid-1916 shortly after having declared himself emperor, a political vacuum ensued, leading to a period of civil war between the Guomindang and the Chinese warlords, who were themselves competing for power. Meanwhile, the Versailles Treaty at the end of World War I affirmed Japan's right to Kiaochow, which led to protests in China that were known as the May Fourth Movement of 1919. It was spearheaded by students and intellectuals who decried China's slowness to modernize. Hundreds of new publications attacked Chinese traditions and extolled foreign ideas about social and cultural matters. In 1921, members of the movement's extreme left wing founded the Chinese Communist Party.

In 1921-1922, a group of foreign powers convened the Washington Conference, where they signed a treaty that rejected Japan's claim to Kiaochow and affirmed the historic Open Door Policy that had granted them considerable freedom to operate in China's treaty ports. This ensured that foreign companies and entrepreneurs would continue to play an important role in the development of the Chinese economy.

Failing to gain support from the Western countries, Sun Yat-sen made an alliance between the Guomindang and the Communists, accepting help from Russian advisors in reorganizing his party along Soviet lines. At its first party congress in 1924, the Guomindang adopted Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People: nationalism, democracy, and livelihood.

Sun died in 1925 and the party leadership was taken over by Chiang Kai-shek, a military leader who gained control of most of south and central China by waging a campaign known as the Northern Expedition. He reversed Sun's policy of cooperating with the Communists and executed many of their leaders, an act that initiated a long-running civil war with them. Chiang chose the southern city of Nanjing as the capital of a new government, which gained international recognition, and he governed there between 1927 and 1937, a period known as the Nanjing Decade. In opposition to the Guomindang, the Communists set up a government in Jiangxi, but Chiang's continued military campaigns forced them to abandon the province in 1934 and begin a long march to the north-west, during which Mao Zedong became the party's leader. The Communists established a base in Yan'an, where they continued to struggle against the Guomindang. The same year that the long march began, Chiang introduced the New Life Movement, a set of dicta intended to enforce personal discipline, build character, and counter excess and corruption. Guomindang organizations sought to maintain its tenets through propaganda campaigns and harassment of those who did not toe the line.

Taking advantage of the ongoing conflict between the Guomindang and the Communists, the Japanese invaded Manchuria in 1931 and established a puppet state, Manchukuo, in 1932. Five years later, Japan mounted a full-scale invasion of China, provoking a struggle with a Chinese united front. The invasion quickly became part of Japan's larger ambition to dominate Asia in a Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, which was challenged by the Allied forces that fought Japan in the Pacific theater during World War II.

In Southeast Asia, the entire region was under colonial rule in the period before World War II, with the exception of Siam, which was permanently renamed Thailand in 1949. Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam were part of French Indochina. The Dutch East Indies, now Indonesia, belonged to the Netherlands and Britain controlled Burma, Malaya, Hong Kong, and Singapore. While under United States dominion, the Philippines underwent a series of steps towards independence. Though Siam remained independent and espoused a rhetoric of economic self-sufficiency, the country still depended primarily on exports of teak and tin, while manufacturing few finished goods of its own. Local handicraft production continued in the region's villages as it did in India, while cities supported some small industries like metal, tile, and furniture workshops, printing presses, and heavy equipment maintenance. For the most part, colonial officials treated native crafts as an art form to be shown off at exhibitions in Europe.

