# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

World War I began in 1914 but the United States did not enter the conflict until early 1917. Supporting the Allies who were fighting against Germany, the Americans initially provided naval support to the British and only sent ground troops abroad in the spring of 1918, just eight months before the Germans surrendered and the war ended. Consequently the United States government suffered far fewer losses than other countries involved in the war, all of which were economic rivals.

As a result, America was the preeminent industrial nation after World War I and its economy expanded rapidly during the 192os, due to a combination of technological advances, managerial innovation, and aggressive marketing. These tendencies were all in place by the late 19th century but they were both accelerated and refined after the war. What also contributed to American economic growth in the 192os was an increasing involvement with foreign markets for selling finished goods as well as obtaining raw materials.

Many large companies developed their research activities following the earlier models of Kodak, General Electric, and Westinghouse. By 1929 there were more than I,ooo industrial laboratories in the United States, up considerably from only 1oo before World War I. During the 192os, for example, Du Pont had a staff of 1,ooo scientists, engineers, and technicians who worked in several labs. The company's aim was to shift from the manufacture of armaments to chemical products including rayon fibers and cellophane films.

A major breakthrough was the invention of nylon, often considered to be the first synthetic fiber, and in 1938 Du Pont successfully introduced nylon stockings as an affordable alternative to silk. Other synthetic materials that were invented in Du Pont's labs included neoprene, a rubber substitute, and various enamels such as the quick-drying Duco and Dulux, which enabled Du Pont to dominate the automobile paint market in the 1930s.

The new materials that came out of the Du Pont labs were part of a much larger stream of synthetics that were widely adopted during the 192os and 1930s for new products. Many were variants of celluloid, a thermoplastic that was invented in the mid-19th century, but others came later: Monel—-a stainless metal alloy created in 19o1 and composed primarily of nickel and copper; Bakelite—a synthetic plastic that was developed around 19o9; and Formica—a composite that was invented by two researchers at Westinghouse in 1912. Originally used for electrical insulation, Formica was employed extensively in the 192os and 193os as a surface laminate for kitchen furniture and counter tops.

Two of the most significant materials created during the interwar period were Plexiglas, an acrylic plastic developed in 1933, and fiberglass, a durable material made from bundles of glass fibers that was invented in 1938 by Russell Slayter (1896–1964), a researcher at Owens-Corning. Originally used for insulation purposes, fiberglass was later adopted for the manufacture of furniture, automobiles, and even surfboards. In general, manufacturers were quick to make use of all the new materials for many different products from combs and bathroom accessories to clocks and radios.

Historian Thomas Hughes has noted that the rise of large corporate research laboratories came to replace independent inventors like Thomas Edison as the primary source of American innovation, yet he also states that these laboratories were more conservative in their methods; consequently, radical breakthroughs such as the invention of the jet engine, the helicopter, magnetic recording, and air conditioning were still made by independent inventors, who were now peripheral to the national research effort rather than central to it as Thomas Edison had once been.

The intensification of research activity resulted in exceptional productivity and created a surplus of goods that American manufacturers actively marketed both at home and abroad. The European economies had been weakened by the war, and a strong demand for American products existed. Large American retailers like Woolworth's, Montgomery Ward, and A & P opened stores abroad and introduced American retail techniques to their new environments including mail order catalogs, appealing packaging, money-back guarantees, and high-pressure sales tactics.

Other American companies became international conglomerates during this period through investing in or purchasing foreign competitors. By 193o, for example, General Electric either controlled or influenced most of the major electrical companies worldwide. American automobile manufacturers also came to dominate world markets by opening assembly plants in Europe, Latin America, and more distant countries such as Japan, Turkey, Australia, and the Soviet Union.

World War I had shown American industrialists how important foreign resources were and prompted a shift from consuming domestic raw materials to strategies for obtaining needed materials abroad. The industrialists successfully enlisted the government's help in gaining access to oil in the Middle East and Latin America, extracting rubber from Liberia, and purchasing failing sugar mills in Cuba and banana plantations in Central America. By 1929, the United States, with British partners in numerous cases, also controlled production of many of the world's resources including nickel, aluminum, asbestos, copper, iron, tin, and manganese.

The corporate shift from a national economy to an international one occurred for a number of reasons.

First, the American government provided political and diplomatic resources to support it. Second, it was facilitated by the managerial efficiency of large companies such as General Electric, Ford, and Standard Oil. Third, these companies viewed the world and its resources from an entrepreneurial rather than a colonial perspective which stimulated more aggressive and inventive methods of economic accumulation. Fourth and finally, the government introduced harsh trade and monetary policies that maintained high tariffs at home, while exerting stringent terms on foreign nations for the repayment of loans.

Herbert Hoover, an engineer who served as Secretary of Commerce from 1921 to 1929, strongly supported the expansion of American enterprise abroad without government regulation. At home, he was a strong advocate of industrial efficiency and played a major role in producing the Waste in Industry Report of 192ı, which advocated the standardization and simplification of manufacturing practices to reduce industrial waste. As Secretary of Commerce, Hoover inaugurated a new Division of Simplified Practices to foster agreement among producers and consumers on how to cut down the number of sizes and models of consumer products. He continued to advocate such policies after he became President in 1929

Others outside the government joined the movement to eliminate waste. Among them was Stuart Chase, a statistician who wrote a series of books during the 192os—The Tragedy of Waste (1925), Your Money's Worth (1927), which he co-authored with F. J. Shlink, and Men and Machines (1929)—-in which he claimed that American industry was manufacturing far more than people needed and that many products were of dubious quality. Chase was particularly critical of the squandered resources that had gone to produce “junk and litter and waste." In a prescient statement of 1932, he wrote, "Our children and our grandchildren will have a bitter bill to pay. We are living on our economic capital where other ages have lived on their economic income."

Chase also called attention to the lack of facilities to evaluate new products. In Your Money's Worth, he and his co-author cited the Bureau of Standards, a federal laboratory that was housed within the Department of Commerce over which Herbert Hoover presided for eight years, as a good example of a regulatory agency that could evaluate products and identify those that were poorly made. Chase was active in the nascent consumer movement of the early 193os that led to the founding of the Consumers Union, an independent product-testing and information organization, in 1936.

Chase's arguments for the economic use of resources and the reduction of waste were countered by spokesmen from the advertising industry, notably Roy Sheldon and Egmont Arens, who argued in their book Consumer Engineering (1932) that the real problem of the American economy was underconsumption. The function of the advertising agency, they stated, was to convince American consumers that new products ought to be replaced frequently even if they were still serviceable. For these advertising men, design was simply a technique to make products look attractive in order to increase their sales appeal.

The term “consumer engineering" was introduced by advertising executive Ernest Elmo Calkins (1868–1964) in an address to a convention of advertising professionals some time before 1932. Sheldon and Arens developed the concept in their book, calling "consumer engineering" the new business science. They justified the approach by claiming that resources were available in abundance and that consumers preferred a steady stream of new products. What was positive about their approach to design was their emphasis on improving the quality of products to make them more appealing, but in making that argument they paid no heed to the warnings of Chase and others that the prodigious waste of what they called "progressive obsolescence" would leave a debt for future generations to pay.

Like most advertisers, manufacturers, and designers in the interwar years, Sheldon and Arens identified women as the nation's primary consumers.

In 192o, women won the right to vote. This new opportunity was coupled with their growing presence in the workforce, primarily in secretarial jobs and other pink collar" occupations. However, large numbers of married women stayed at home and most advertising was targeted to them.

Electrification in American homes increased from 24 percent in 1917 to almost 90 percent by 1940. This created a huge market for electrical appliances of all kinds. The fastest-selling new products of the 192os were telephones, radios, and automobiles. The number of telephones jumped from about I million in 1900 to over 20 million in 193o. The rapid spread of radio, which surpassed automobiles in sales per capita, resulted in national broadcast networks that enabled people to share in the live transmission of cultural and news events, while making it possible for advertisers to address the listening public as a national market.

However, the growth in automobile sales far surpassed any other industry. From fewer than 5o0,o0o cars and other vehicles in 19oo, the number jumped to nearly 10 million in 192o, more than 26 million in 1930, and began to level off at 32 million in 1940. The sale of automobiles, led by the inexpensive models of Henry Ford but fueled as well by the styling of General Motors, transformed the American landscape and generated enormous industries of road building, gasoline distribution, and the construction of suburban homes.

