# Introduction

> Section: preface | Source: 05-Result-MD\03-Design-History-replenish-1\02-Books\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin\auto\World History Of Design - Volume 2_ World War I To World War -- Victor Margolin.md

## Introduction

World War II served as a powerful stimulus for design, especially the design of weaponry, although many of the new discoveries in science and engineering that were prompted by the war also had valuable applications for peacetime products when the war ended. From the moment German armored tank divisions rolled into Poland in 1939, it was clear that technology would be a driving force in determining how the war was fought. Forbidden to rearm after defeat in World War I, Germany nonetheless began to secretly develop tanks, planes, and other weapons in the 192os and 1930s

Meanwhile, the French and British armies as well as the United States military were slow to introduce new weapons. By 1939, for example, the British Army lacked armored vehicles, while the Germans had amassed a tank corps that was unequaled anywhere in the world. The German panzer divisions, as the tank divisions were known, worked together with mechanized infantry, foot soldiers, and dive-bombers to assault the Allies on multiple fronts. The mechanization of warfare was, in fact, central to the German strategy of "blitzkrieg" or lightning war, which was evident in the early years of World War II. In 1939, the German Luftwaffe or Air Force was the strongest airborne fighting unit anywhere.

Once Germany and Great Britain declared war on each other and Germany declared war on the United States, Great Britain and the United States began to mobilize rapidly. Though the Soviet Union signed a treaty of non-aggression with Germany in

August 1939, its military continued to produce new weapons enabling the country to successfully engage the Germans after Hitler attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941. Japan had begun an aggressive military build-up in the 192os, which prepared the country to occupy Manchuria in 1931 and then attack Shanghai in 1937, thus initiating an invasion that soon became part of a wider war.

Although the United States had begun its military mobilization before the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor in December 1941, that event and the subsequent American declaration of war on Japan the day after the attack spurred the rapid deployment of American resources that led to the near miraculous volume of war materiel that the United States produced between 1942 and 1945. Numerous new inventions accompanied the production of tanks, planes, and ships, due to the close collaboration between the American scientific community and the military. It was during this period, in fact, when many civilian business executives became involved in weapons manufacturing, that the military industrial complex about which President Dwight Eisenhower warned in a speech of 196r began.

Given the technical demands that accompanied the design of much military equipment, the idea of design expanded during World War II. Physicists, chemists, mathematicians and other scientists, along with engineers from all engineering disciplines, worked on projects for new types of aircraft, tanks, amphibious vehicles, and rockets. Collaboration was essential to address the complex challenges of new weapons. Not all countries were able to successfully organize the relationship between science, engineering, design, and production, but those that did created weapons whose physical and technical complexity far exceeded anything that had been designed previously. Weaponry developed rapidly as teams of experts made continual refinements to the planes, ships, and other weapons they designed. In some cases, improved versions were manufactured annually or even more rapidly. New mass-production methods were also introduced to vastly increase the volume of weapons that factories turned out.

Though all countries engaged in the war had centralized organizations that were responsible for war materiel, they didn't function with equal efficiency. Rivalries between military services or between such services and civilian organizations were impediments, as were disagreements about what weapons to produce. Besides the ordinary weaponry that every country manufactured, there were also the super weapons that were introduced late in the war—the Vi and V2 rockets in Germany, and the atomic bomb in the United States. The use of these weapons permanently altered the terms of military engagement.

New propaganda techniques were also pioneered in World War II. Radio played a central role, providing not only news of how the war was progressing but inspirational speeches from national leaders. Radio broadcasts from Britain also reached the occupied countries of Europe, where listeners picked them up on clandestine receivers. Posters continued to play an important role as a means to motivate or encourage more production, the purchase of war bonds, or hatred of the enemy. They were widely employed on the home fronts, while leaflets, dropped from planes over enemy territory, were instrumental in swaying opinion and especially in encouraging the surrender of enemy troops.

